Climate Policies: A Burden or a Gain? 

Thierry Bréchet 
Henry Tulkens 

CES IFO WORKING PAPER NO. 4147 
CATEGORY 9: RESOURCE AND ENVIRONMENT ECONOMICS 
MARCH 2013 

An electronic version of the paper may be downloaded 
• from the SSRN website:  
• from the RePEc website:  
• from the CESifo website: T -group.org/wp T 
CESifo Working Paper No. 4147 

Climate Policies: A Burden or a Gain? 
 
Abstract 
 
That climate policies are costly is evident and therefore often creates majo r fears. But the 
alternative (no action) also has a cost. Mitigation costs and damages incurred depend on what 
the climate policies are; moreover, they are substitutes. This brings climate policies naturally in the realm of benefit- cost analysis. In this paper we illustrate the “direct” cost components 
of various policies, and then confront them with the benefits generated, that is, the damage cost avoided. However, the sheer benefit -cost criterion is not a sufficient incentive to induce 
cooperation among c ountries, a necessary condition for an effective global climate policy. 
Thus, we also explore how to use this criterion in the context of international climate cooperation. 
JEL-Code: Q540, H870, D610, D900, F420, Q200 . 
Keywords: climate policy, integrated assessment, cost- benefit analysis, climate cooperation . 

Thierry Bréchet 
CORE & Louvain School of Management 
(LSM) / Catholic University of Louvain 
Voie du Roman Pays 34 
Belgium - 1348 L ouvain- la-Neuve 
thierry. brechet @uclouvain.be Henry Tulkens 
CORE / Catholic University of Louvain 
Voie du Roman Pays 34 
Belgium - 1348 L ouvain- la-Neuve 
henry.  
 January 17, 2013 
This paper originates in a presentation made by the authors at the 31st MIT Forum on Climate 
Change hosted in Brussels by CORE (the Center for Operations Research and Econometrics 
at Université catholique de Louvain) in October 2010. The present version was written while Bréchet was a visiting research fellow at the Grant ham Institute for Climate Change, Imperial 
College London as well as a visiting professor at the European University in St Petersburg, Russia, while Tulkens was a visiting professor at University Cà Foscari di Venezia, Italy and a visiting researcher at FE EM, the Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei. The authors are grateful to 
Vincent Vandernoot for computational assistance, to participants of the MIT Global Change Forum for many insightful comments, and to the institutions mentioned above for their hospitality an d support . 
 
1. Introduction and plan of the paper 
That climate policies are costly is evident and therefore often creates major fears 
in industry. Understandably so: actions of mitigation of GHG emissions that most policies 
consist of require considerable resources, hence entail high costs. Actors of industrial life 
consider this as a burden for our economies. Is it a bearable one? 
To app reciate that, consider the alternative, i.e. no action, and its cost: no action 
means our economies incurring damages, possibly considerable (see IPCC (2007) , which 
will also be a burden. Notice that the two categories of costs , mitigation costs and 
damage s incurred, do add up . However, the amounts of each of the two terms in the sum 
vary depending upon what the policies are. In fact, they are substitutes: indeed, the more mitigation and adaptation actions, the less damages will be incurred, and the less of the 
former, the more of the latter. The reverse also holds: severe adverse climate impacts provide strong incentives for emission abatement. This naturally follows from realizing 
that policies aim at avoiding damages . In that perspective, avoiding damages appears to 
be the benefit that accompanies climate policies. And if that benefit appears to be larger 
than the mitigation and adaptation cost (the “direct” cost, for short), such policies can be deemed economically sound. Actually, costs and benefits are the two sides of the same 
coin. 
This reasoning brings climate policies naturally in the realm o f benefit- cost 
analysis, a well -established instrument of decision- making in the public sector. In this 
paper, we wish first to simply illustrate the “direct” cost com ponents of various policies 
(Section 2), then to confront them with the benefits generated , that is, the d amage cost 
avoided (Section 3) and draw preliminary conclusions on their respective justification. The purpose here is mostly to offer the reader information on the orders of magnitude as 
provided by published advanced models, thereby avoiding him to enter into the details of 
these. 
 In climate affairs, there is however an additional dimension to the benefit side just 
identified. In the way it is invoked above, the benefit- cost criterion makes no reference to 
the multi -national component of the issue. When the problem that requires action is of 
exclusively national nature, benefits as well as costs are those that accrue to the country 
and these onl y determine the decision. Transposing benefit- cost analysis to enlighten 
decision- making on issues with international impacts cannot simply consist in an 
addition of national benefits and costs of domestically chosen strategies. In a multi-
national context, there is often - and certainly in the climate change case - a superadditive 
aspect to the possible joint actions by the countries, in the sense that together they can (i ) 
do more that the sum of their alternative individualistic policies, and ( ii) generate a larger 
joint benefit than the sum of their benefits when acting individualistically. 
 Therefore, the sheer benefit- cost criterion is not a sufficient incentive to induce 
the synergies whereby cooperative behavior s can achieve efficiency at the world l evel. 
Additional and specific motivations of some sort for adopting non individualistic policies 
are called for. What can they consist of? In Section 5 of this paper we explore why and go 
beyond the standard framework of benefit- cost analysis. 

2. What is the cost of a climate policy? 
2.1 The pol icy’s direct cost as a burden for the economy 
 A comprehensive and interesting synthesis of the direct cost approach is provided 
in the survey by E denhofer et. al . (2010) . This survey covers four major numerical 
simulation models that are widely used in policy discussions, namely: MERGE (Kypreos 
and Bahn, 2003) , REMIND -R (Leimbach et al. , 2010) , POLES -ETSAP (European 
Commission, 1996) and TIMER (Bouw man et al. 2006) . All models project how the 
economy may evolve spontaneously in the future ( about a century ), and then examine 
how a couple of discretionary climate policies a ffects the estimated evolution of the GDP s, 
both national and at the world level . The policies considered are expressed in terms of 
global caps either on emission levels, or on carbon concentration in the atmosphere, or 
still on average temperature increase. These caps are introduced as exogenous 
constraints in the models , which for t he rest are optimal growth models . 
 As to how the burden is measured, in the MERGE and REMIND models the cost is 
measured as discounted cumulative GDP losses up to 2100 relative to some baseline, and 
it is expressed in percent of the baseline GDP over the same period. The POLES and TIMER models report instead the increase in abatement costs relative to the baseline , 
also expressed in percent of GDP. For all models the discount rate is 3 percent a year and net present values are calculated with 2000 as the base year. The results are reported in figure 7 in Edenhofer et. al . (2010, ) . 
 Edenhofer et al. (2010) focus on three policies. All of them are expressed in terms 
of alternative caps on global GHG concentration in 2100, respectively of 400, 450 and 550 
ppm CO
2-eq. Two key conclusions emerge from this model compariso n. First, the direct 
costs of the policies considered are small: the 550 ppm cap entails a 0.8% loss of 
cumulated loss world GDP in 2100, the 400 ppm cap a 2.5% loss. Second, despite differences in the orders of magnitude, all models agree on the qualitative message that 
policy costs are limited.

2.2 The policy’s genuine cost 
 In case of “no policy”, wh at is the burden? Is there at all a cost for the economy ? To 
be sure, what we have described above as “ direct” costs are absent, since no action 
entailing them - mitigation or adaptation - is taken in that case. Unfortunately, this is 
only one side of the coin, as other costs are invol ved. Indeed, global warming has 
powerful physical impacts on earth such as storms, coastal erosion, sea level rise and 
droughts. These in turn entail damage s that are materialized in losses of economic goods, 
properties and assets, let alone human lives. T hese damages are sheer destructions of 
parts of the economy, and they are maximal in case of no action. Clearly there is a cost of 
doing nothing . 
3 It can be noticed that, in this model comparison, the choice of the policy instruments that woul d be able to 
implement the policy within and among the countries is not discussed. This boils down to assume that these 
instruments are cost -effective, like a global carbon tax. In other words, the global effectiveness of the scenarios is 
analyzed disregar ding the issue of their national implementation. See Bosetti and Victor (2011) for a discussion 
on that point. 

 But policies, if rational, aim at reducing damages. Therefore, the true cost to society 
of any climate policy is to be thought of in numbers which are net of the damage costs the 
policy allows one to avoid - in other words, the numbers obtained by subtracting the 
value of the avoided damages from the “burden” cost described above. If negative, the 
result of the s ubtraction means that the policy is justified according to the standards of 
benefit- cost analysis. Indeed, the “benefit” of the avoided damage thanks to the action 
then compensates for the “burden” entailed by this action. 
 It is important to note at this point that for any country both the benefits and the 
costs are not to be considered in isolation: their magnitude depends also on the policies 
implemented abroad, be they the result of international agreements or not. This 
extension of the reasoning will b e the topic of Section 5 . 
3. Evaluating two policies in terms of both benefits and costs 
The most striking example of a statement on climate change made recently in the 
spirit of benefit- cost analysis is the Stern Review (Stern, 2007). Using an integrated 
assessment model of the world economy, namely PAGE, the Review estimates that , for the 
policy it defines , benefits in terms of value of damages avoided would range between 5 
and 20 % of world GDP every year and for ever, whereas mitigation costs to achieve this 
damage avoidance would amount to about 1 to 2 % of world GDP, every year and for 
ever. We propose to apply the same reasoning to two policy choices, namely the 650 and 
550 ppm caps , to see whether or not they pass the benefit- cost criterion. We do this by 
using our own integrated assessment model , namely CWS ,4 so as t o see whether the Stern 
result can be confirmed by means of this alternative measurement tool .5 
The integrated assessment model we employ, CWS (for CLIMNEG World 
Simulation model), is close the original RICE model by Nordhaus and Yang (1996) or its 
variations as in Eyckmans and Tulkens (2003), Bréchet et al. (2012), and Yang (2008). In the model, the worl d is split into 18 regions or countries. An essential characteristic of an 
IAM is the endogenous feedback between the economy and the climate. Decision variables are capital accumulation (to sustain economic growth) and GHGs emission abatement (to control climate change). CWS can also be seen as a general equilibrium 
model in the sense where all the dimensions of the economy are endogenous, in 
particular capital accumulation. The model is solved as an optimal control problem in 
which investment rate in phys ical capital and abatement efforts are the control variables. 
The objective function to be maximized is the intertemporal welfare expressed as the discounted green consumption ( Z), i.e. gross output (Y , driven by capital accumulation 
and population growth) net of investment in capital ( I), emission abatement costs ( C) and 
climate damages ( D, driven by GHGs concentration and temperature increase), so that we 
have Z = Y - I - C - D for all countries and at all time periods. 
4 A full description of the CWS model can be found in Bréchet et al . (2011) for the 6 -region version, and in 
Bréchet et al . (2012) for the 18 -region version (which is, by the way, also stochastic). 
5 See Kolstad and Toman (2005) for an introduction and overview of integrated assessment climate -
economy models and Bréchet and Luterbacher (2013) for a discussion on their usefulness for policy 
suppor t. 

3.1 A Benefit -cost analysis of the 650 and 550 ppm cap policies 
Let us consider the following two global policies: 
• “cap-650” : a policy of global emissions abatement which ensures optimal growth of 
the economy by ( i) maximizing present and future green consumption, that is, net of 
both the abatement and damage costs entailed by the policy, and (ii) constraining 
abatements to the condition that the concentrations they entail in the atmosphere 
never exceed 650 ppm CO 2-eq over the period 2000- 2100. 
• “cap-550”: a similar policy with the only difference that the global concentration is 
constrained never to exceed the tighter bound of 550 ppm CO 2-eq.6 
We wish to compare these two policies with two benchmark scenarios that are 
common in the literature: 
• “BAU” : Business -a-usual, which means no discretionary abatement policy and thus no 
abatement costs; d amage costs are as they result from the laissez faire emissions that 
accompany the natural growth of the economy and no constr aint applies to CO 2 
concentration. 
• “COOP ”: Optimal abatement policy at the world level, i.e. the one that maximizes 
present and future green consumption without binding constraint on CO 2 
concentration. 
In other words, the “BAU” scenario is the pure case o f “no action” in the framework of 
a world market economy , whereas “COOP ” describes the best global outcome that can be 
achieved in combining economic growth and environmental protection, with no 
institutional framework being specified for its achievement and no redistributive effects 
among countries being taken into account either . 
To sum up, we thus consider two policies and two scenarios in this section. The first 
two ( “cap-650” and “cap-550” ) are well defined programs of global action ( i.e. action at 
the world level), where as the other two (“BAU ” and “COOP ”) are only benchmarks 
provided for the sake of comparison of which the former describes an environmentally 
“worst” case in a growth context, and the latter an environmentally “best” case 
compatible with growth. 
Figure 1 displays the time profiles of GHGs emissions implied by the two policies and 
the two benchmark scenarios. Thus for example , optimal economic growth under the 
“cap-550” policy implies to let global emission s increase up to 9.7 GtC per ye ar in 2060 
and then to let them decrease down to 5.0 GtC per year in 2100. As for the “cap-650” 
policy , the maximum yearly emissions are higher (14.1 GtC) and this maximum is reached 
only later, in 2080. 
It is interesting to see that these two policies generate emission levels far below those 
of the worst case: thus , the cap -550 policy require s in 2100 global emissions to be 
reduced by 76 percent with respect to those of the “BAU” scenario . This policy also 
succeeds in bringing emissions back to their lev el of the year 2000. It is also interesting to 
notice that in both policies emissions are below those of the “best” scenario , as calculated 
6 The 400 ppm cap in 2100 is not a feasible solution for the CWS model, as it is for many other models 
mention ed in Edenhofer et al. 2010. Thus, for most climate -economy models reviewed here , this cap cannot 
be reached. A view shared by many climatolog ists, actually. This is the reason why we consider only 550 
and 650 ppm caps in this paper. 

by the CWS model . Note in particular that emissions under the cap -650 policy are close to 
those of the COOP scenario for a major part of the time period cover ed. 
Figure 1. World GHG emissions in the two policies and two scenarios 
 
 Let us now consider the respective benefits and costs of these policies and 
scenarios. We do this analysis with the same kind of calculatio ns and graphs as used by 
Edenhofer et al . (2010). 
 As far costs are concerned, w e calculate the cumulated yearly losses in GDP up to 
2100, discounted at a 2 -percent yearly discount rate, and compare these magnitudes with 
what they amount to in the BAU (no-policy) scenario . Benefits ( i.e. avoided climate 
damages) are evaluated exactly in the same way. Figure 2 is a bar chart showing both 
costs and benefits, as well as the difference between the two (costs minus benefits). 
The Figure reveals that the policies ’ costs as reported by the CWS model are a 1.1 
percent loss in cumulated GDP for the “cap -550” policy, and a 0.4 percent loss for the 
“cap -650” policy (green bars). These cost numbers are of an order of magnitude similar to 
those provided by Edenhofer et a l. (2010) and reported above. The interesting thing now 
is the comparison of these costs with the environmental benefits. The cumulated benefits 
in these two scenarios are (see the purple bars) respectively of 0.4 percent of GDP and 0.3 
percent. Thus, they do not outweigh the cumulated costs. But the appealing result is that 
netted out of the benefits , the “true cost ” becomes only 0.6 percent and even 0.1 percent of 
world GDP, respectively. In other words, the “cost” the policy is overestimated by 67% for cap-550 and by 258% for cap -650 with respect to what we have called above the “true 
cost”. Such difference is so large that it cannot be ignored in the political debate. 

Figure 2. Costs , Benefits , and True Costs in comparison with BAU 
 for the “cap -550”, “cap -650” policies and the “ COOP ” scenario, 
 (all measured by means of the CWS model 
in % of world GDP , cumulated over the period 2000 -2100 ) 
 . 
 
 When we compute the “ COOP ” scenario with the CWS model , we obtain that 
benefits outweigh the costs . This appears on the Figure by the true cost being negative - 
and this implies that a policy implementing this scenario is socially profitable . By the 
definition of the COOP scenario it is also optimal, i.e. maximizing social welfare. By 
contrast, the two pol icies with their tight constraints of 550 ppm and 650 ppm, 
respectively, are both too stringent: they overshoot. 
It must be emphasized that huge uncertainties prevail in the calibration of the 
models underlying such calculations. They affect all aspects o f the costs entailed by 
climate change, but criticism s often concentrate on the fact that damage costs are very 
crude ly estimated. Before being able to propose a more reliable calibration of the 
functions that are currently available for making these estim ates (which is not within the 
scope of this paper) , one way to obviate the difficulty is to carry out sensitivity analyses 
on the parameters of these functions so as to have an idea of how they impact the results . 

3.2 A s ensitivity analysis 
 Given our concern with the benefits we provide here a sensitivity analysis bearing 
on the damage cost function used in the CWS model. This increasing function is of the 
exponential form, with the exponent assumed to be 2.0 in all countries in the previous 
calculations . In this section we change this parameter to 2.7, making the common damage 
function much steeper. 
 The computational results are first disp layed in Figure 3 for world GHG emissions. 
By definition, the emissio n profile is strictly the same for the “BAU” scenario. But two 
very interesting and innovative results come out from this figure. 
 The first one is about the time profile of GHG emissions in the cap-550 and cap -
650 scenarios, which differ from Fig. 1. Rem ember that the constraints are to not 
outreac h the stated cap on GHG concentration. The model thus determines the optimal 
growth i.e. the one that maximizes intertemporal green consumption if the economy 
operates under these constraints . Because climate damages are now evaluated to be 
heavier, their impact on welfare is also stro nger, which pushes up the countries to devote 
more reso urces to abatement of emissions. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 for the cap -550 
policy case: the maximum emission level is now 9.0 GtC, while it was 10.0 GtC previously 
(both reached in 2070) . Eventually this increase in abatement translates into a smaller 
green consumption level (not shown on the Figure though ). 
 The second appealing result is that the “cap -650” policy now coincides with the 
“COOP ” scenario over the whole simulation period. Thus, this policy brings the world on a 
green consumption path virtually identical to the one that maximizes world welfare 
(under our parameter value s). This reveals that the world optimal sol ution (“ COOP ”) is 
far from being completely unrealistic from a policy standpoint and should not be 
considered as purely theoretical. Sometimes the best can be achieved. In other words, and in the reverse perspective, prescriptive policies discussed today in the political area 
(here, “cap -650”) may meet the normative analysis (here, “ COOP ”). 
 Although environmentally more stringent, and therefore perhaps politically more 
attractive to some, the “cap-550” policy is not better welfarewise because it restricts 
green consumption too much: it is actually too stringent. 
Let us now turn back to the comparison between costs and benefits by using the 
same presentation as in Section 3.1. The fact that the countries are more sensitive to 
temperature increases translates into our two given policies entailing larger abatement efforts than before (for the “cap -550”policy: 1.2% against 1.1% previously; for “cap -650”: 
0.9% against 0.4% previously) as well as larger benefits. This appears from comparing Fig. 4 with Fig. 2). 
What is the new balance between costs and benefits? Fig. 4 shows that the “cap -
550” policy entails higher costs than benefits, this resulting in a 0.05% net GDP cumulated loss over the century. The policy is thus not socially profitable. By contrast, the 
balance is positive for the “cap -650” policy (a cumulated gain of 0.30%). The “cap -650” 
policy thus passes the cost- benefit criterion, just lik e the scenario it is identical to. 

Figure 3. World GHG s emissions with s teeper damage functions in the two policies and 
two scenarios . 
 
Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis for costs versus benefits for “ cap-550”, “cap -650” and 
“COOP ”, with steeper damages functions 

4. Regional acceptability: a necessary condition for reaching an international 
agreement 
 The previous analysis confirms that t he genuine cost s of the two policies discussed 
are, after all, quite small. They can even be negative, that is, they may have positive 
impacts : if the modeling is correct, the “cap -650” policy is not costly but beneficial to the 
world as a whole. Then, why is it so hard for the world to agree on such a policy ? A major 
obstacle lies in the fact that the respective levels of costs and of benefits differ widely 
among countries . Indeed, a global policy which is good for all, considered as an aggregate, 
may not be good for everyone, considered individually. We illustrate that with numbers 
provided by the CWS model for the “cap -650” policy . Fig. 5 shows benefits and costs 

geographically broken down as they occur in the 18 regions distinguished in the CWS 
model. Costs are displayed on the vertical axis, benefits on the horizontal one. Both are 
expressed as previously in percent of cumulated GDP until 2100 . 
 With this diagram the acceptability of a policy by each country can be characterized 
in three ways . First, in terms of the respective importance of the domestic benefits and 
costs each country incurs under the policy: if a country is loca ted above the 45° line it 
experiences benefits larger than costs , which shows the policy to be domestically 
profitable. T he country is likely to support that policy . By contrast, for a country located 
below the 45° line the policy is not domestically profi table, which makes the country 
likely to be against it. In either case, the larger the distance to the 45° line, the stronger 
the incentive to support or to reject the policy . The diagram thus shows distinct winners 
and losers. 
 Second, while a policy entailing benefits equal to costs for all countries would put 
them all on the 45° line , a globally beneficial policy with benefits larger than costs for all 
countries would put them all above the 45° line. By the same token, for any globally 
beneficial polic y but not so for all of them , the points in the diagram would be scattered in 
such a way that the set of countries lying above the line enjoy profitability for a total 
amount larger than the total amount of the losses incurred by those lying below . This 
observation suggests that in such cases, transfers of commodities from the former to the 
latter can be envisaged, so as to b ring the latter to the line while keeping the former 
above, albeit closer to it. On the diagram, a transfer would be represented by an 
horizontal shift of the point that represents the country: to the right if the country pays 
out the transfer, and to the left if the country receives a transfer. 
 Third , the radial distance of any point to the origin can be seen as an overall 
measure of how much is at stake macroeconomically for a country adopting the climate 
policy under consideration. Indeed, that distance expresses, in percentage points of the 
country’s gross domestic product, the two cost components that we deal with in this 
paper, nam ely the direct cost on the abscissa and the benefit of avoided damage cost on 
the ordinate. 
 For countries whose point is located close to the origin, both benefits and costs are 
only a minor proportion of their GDP, so that not much is at stake with the policy under 
consideration and the risk of wasting resources by erroneously supporting it is therefore 
not very high. Things are different for countries located far from the origin: costs and/or 
benefits in that case are a large proportion of their GDP , and the consequences of making 
mistakes in the estimation of the policy’s components, or in its implementation, 
constitute a much larger risk . 
 In view of the important uncertainties attached to the empirical assessments of the 
costs and benefits of climate change, be they large or small, one may invoke risk aversion 
to explain that the more a country is located away from the origin on this chart, the more 
likely it is to be reluctant to adopt the policy. 
 Finally, Fig. 5 suggests a classification of countr ies in three distinct clusters: 
• Cluster 1 , composed of developed countries ( e.g. USA, EU, JPN, CAN...): with moderate 
benefits as well as moderate abatement costs , they have positive but weak incentives 
to support the “ cap-650” policy ; 

• Cluster 2 , composed of less-developed countries ( e.g. AFR, Mediterraneans, RAS...): 
they bear high abatement costs but also high benefits: they have positive incentives 
for supporting the “cap -650” policy; 
• Cluster 3 , composed of intermediate emerging countries ( e.g. CHN, Mid dle East 
Asia, ...): they face high abatement costs but limited benefits , so they are likely to be 
strongly against the “cap-650” policy , unless transfers are offered to them by the 
group of winning countries . 
 
Figure 5. Costs versus benefits at the regional level for the “cap -650” policy 

5. Summary and conclusion 
 The message of this paper is a simple one. That preventive actions against the 
effects of climate change are costly is widely argued; that their benefits are even more 
considerable is less advertised. Yet, these are two equally inescapable components of the 
problem. While t he huge complexity of both the physical and the economic aspects of the 
problem justifies the recourse to highly sop histicated modeling techniques, benefit- cost 
analysis is also necessary to provide justification of action, because it is a simple and 
basic tool of economic reasoning, as well as a powerful instrument to convince the public 
at large. 
CHN MEA 
AUZ IND 
EU 
CAN USA AFR 
JPN OEU MED 
LAO RAS 
LAM 

 In this paper, we propose to evaluate cl imate policies by combining the two 
approaches of modeling and benefit- cost analysis. That combination is possible if the 
economic modeling is complete, that is, if it covers what we have called the genuine cost 
of policies and not only their direct costs. We conclude in terms that are precise enough 
for decision taking, excluding some policies (e.g. the one aiming at the concentration 
objective of 550 ppm), and supporting other ones ( e.g. 650 ppm). For sure, the model we 
used is a stylized one and its parameter values are quite uncertain. Yet the gist of our 
conclusion is less in the absolute numbers t hemselves than in the virtues of the two -fold 
methodology that allowed to formulate them. 
 In that spirit we have replicated with our own model the previous and path 
breaking approach of Stern ( 2006) . Contrary to what some might call a repetition, such 
replication is an essential component of modeling methodology, as is well known in 
physical sciences. Given the utmost economic importance of the policy decisio ns to be 
made, it would be foolish to satisfy ourselves with just one estimate. Only repeated studies, if reasonably converging in their conclusions, can provide a credible basis for action on climate change. 
 By breaking it down in its multi- country or re gional dimensions, our benefit- cost 
analysis further points out, by means of a simple diagram, what is probably the hardest 
obstacle to international cooperation in climate affairs, namely the economic fact that benefits and costs differ widely across countries , and across policies. For some, benefits 
do not reach the level of the direct costs they will endur e even under an optimal policy: 
hence they resist the formation of cooperative international agreements that would 
require them to reduce their emissio ns. In the others , the benefits do outweigh the direct 
costs of mitigation, since this is the case in the aggregate. Thus there is room for the latter 
to comp ensate the former in some way. But p ayment of such compensations also triggers 
resistance. While an economic analysis such as the one above does show that such a 
scheme is feasible, its implementation requires in addition considerable diplomatic skills 
to overcome the said resistances, as experienced by the long and patient negotiation 
process of the U NFCCC. 
7. References 
Barker, T., Scrieciu, S. (2010). “Modeling low climate stabilization with E3MG: towards a 
‘New Economics’ approach to simulating energy -environment- economy system 
dynamics. ” The Energy Journal 31(1) : 137- 164. 
Bosetti, V., Carraro, C. , Galeotti, M., Masetti, E., and Tavoni, M. (2009). “ WITCH: A world 
induced technical change hybrid model. ” The Energy Journal (Special issue) 27(2): 13 -
38. 
Bosetti V., Victor D.G. (2011). “ Politics and economics of second -best regulation of 
greenhouse gas es : the importance of regulatory credibility. ” The Energy Journal 32(1): 
1-24. 
Bouwman, A. F., Kram, T. and Klein Goldewijk, K. eds., (2006), Integrated modelling of 
global environmental change. An overview of IMAGE 2.4 ., Netherlands Environmental 
Assessment Agency (MNP). 
Bréchet, T., Eyckmans, J., Gerard, F., Marbaix, P., Tulkens, H. and van Ypersele, J. -P. (2010), 
“The impact of the unilateral EU commitment on the stability of international climate agreements.” Climate Policy 10: 148- 166. 

Bréchet, T. , Gerard, F. and Tulkens, H. (2011). “Efficiency vs. stability of climate coalitions: 
a conceptual and computational appraisal. ” The Energy Journal 32(1) : 49- 76. 
Bréchet Th. and U. Luterbacher (2013). " Computational models for policy support in 
climate iss ues'', in : U. Luterbacher and D.F. Sprinz (eds) , The Evolving Climate 
Change Regime , MIT Press, forthcoming . 
Bréchet, Th., Thénié, J., Zeimes, Th. and Zuber, S. (2012). “ The benefits of cooperation 
under uncertainty : the case of climate change. ” Environme ntal Modeling and 
Assessment 17(1- 2): 149- 162. 
Chander, P., Tulkens, H., van Ypersele, J -P. and Willems, S. (2002). “The Kyoto Protocol: 
An Economic and Game Theoretic Interpretation”, chapter 6 (pp. 98 -117) in Kriström, 
B., Dasgupta P. and Löfgren K. -G. (eds), Economic Theory for the Environment : Essays in 
Honor of Karl- Göran Mäler, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham. 
Edenhofer, O., Knopf, B., Barker T., Baumstark, L. Bellevrat, E., Château, B., Criqui, P., Isaac, 
M., Kitous, S., Leimbach, M., Lessman, K., Magné, B., Scrieciu, S., Turton, H. and van 
Vuuren, D. (2010). “ The economics of low stabilization: Model comparison of 
mitigation strategies and costs. ” The Energy Journal 31(1) : 11- 48. 
European Commission (1996). POLES 2.2. European Commission DG XII. EUR 1735 8 EN. 
Eyckmans, J. and Tulkens, H. (2003). “Simulating coalitionally stable burden sharing 
agreements for the climate change problem.” Resource and Energy Economics 25: 299 -
327. 
Kypreos, S., and Bahn, O. (2003). “A MERGE model with endogenous technological 
progress.” Environmental Modeling and Assessment 8: 249- 259. 
Leimbach, M., Bauer, N. Baumstark, L. and Edenhofer, O. (2010), “Mitigation costs in a 
globalized world: climate policy analysis with REMIND -R.” Environmental Modeling 
and Assessment 15(3): 155- 173. 
Nordhaus, W.D. (1994). Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D. (2007). A question of balance , Yale University Press. 
Nordhaus, W.D. and Yang, Z. (1996). “A Regional Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of 
Alternative Climate Change Strategies.” American Economic Review 86(4): 741- 765. 
Nordhaus, W.D. and Boyer, J. (2000). Warming the world: Economic models of global 
warming, The MIT Press. 
Nordhaus, W.D. (2007). A question of balance , Yale University Press. 
Stern, N. (2007). The economics of climate change: The Stern review, Cambridge University 
Press. 
Yang Z. (2008). Strategic Bargaining and Cooperation in Greenhouse Gas Mitigations - An 
Integrated assessment Modeling Approach . MIT Press.