EN EN 

 EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION 
Brussels, 11.12.2019 
COM(2019) 640 final 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT, THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN 
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE 
REGIONS 
 
The European Green Deal 
 
2 1. INTRODUCTION - TURNING AN URGENT CH ALLENGE INTO A UNIQU E OPPORTUNITY 
This Communication sets out a European Green Deal for the European Union (EU) 
and its citizens . It resets the Commission’s commitment to tackling climate and 
environmental -related challenges that is this generation’s defining task. The atmosphere 
is warming and the climate is changing with each passing year. One million of the eight 
million species on the planet are at risk of being lost. Forests and oceans are being 
polluted and destroyed1. 
The European Green Deal is a response to these challenges. It is a new growth strategy 
that aims to transform the EU into a fair and prosperous society, with a modern, 
resource -efficient and competitive economy where there are no net emissions of 
greenhouse gases in 2050 and where economic growth is decoupled from resource 
use. 
It also aims to protect, conserve and enhance the EU's natural capit al, and protect 
the health and well -being of citizens from environment -related risk s and impacts. At 
the same time, this transition must be just and inclusive . It must put people first, and pay 
attention to the regions, industries and workers who will face the greatest challenges. 
Since it will bring substantial change, active public participation and confidence in the 
transition is paramount if policies are to work and be accepted. A new pact is needed to 
bring together citizens in all their diversity, wit h national, regional, local authorities, civil 
society and industry working closely with the EU’s institutions and consultative bodies. 
The EU has the collective ability to transform its economy and society to put it on a 
more sustainable path . It can buil d on its strengths as a global leader on climate and 
environmental measures, consumer protection, and workers’ rights. Delivering additional 
reductions in emissions is a challenge. It will require massive public investment and 
increased efforts to direct p rivate capital towards climate and environmental action, while 
avoiding lock -in into unsustainable practices. The EU must be at the forefront of 
coordinating international efforts towards building a coherent financial system that 
supports sustainable solut ions. This upfront investment is also an opportunity to put 
Europe firmly on a new path of sustainable and inclusive growth . The European 
Green Deal will accelerate and underpin the transition needed in all sectors. 
The environmental ambition of the Green Deal will not be achieved by Europe 
acting alone . The drivers of climate change and biodiversity loss are global and are not 
limited by national borders. The EU can use its influence, expertise and financial 
resources to mobilise its neighbours and partner s to join it on a sustainable path. The EU 
will continue to lead international efforts and wants to build alliances with the like -
minded. It also recognises the need to maintain its security of supply and competitiveness 
even when others are unwilling to a ct. 
This Communication presents an initial roadmap of the key policies and measures 
needed to achieve the European Green Deal . It will be updated as needs evolve and the 
 
1 Sources: (i) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Special Report on the impacts of 
global warming of 1.5°C; (ii) Intergovernmental Science -Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Se rvices: 2019 Global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services; (iii) The 
International Resource Panel: Global Resources Outlook 2019: Natural Resources for the Future We 
Want; (iv) European Environment Agency: the European environment - state and outlook 2020: 
knowledge for transition to a sustainable Europe 
 
3 policy responses are formulated. All EU actions and policies will have to contribute t o 
the European Green Deal objectives . The challenges are complex and interlinked. The 
policy response must be bold and comprehensive and seek to maximise benefits for 
health, quality of life, resilience and competitiveness . It will require intense coordina tion 
to exploit the available synergies across all policy areas2. 
The Green Deal is an integral part of this Commission’s strategy to implement the 
United Nation’s 2030 Agenda and the sustainable development goals3, and the other 
priorities announced in P resident von der Leyen’s political guidelines4. As part of the 
Green Deal, the Commission will refocus the European Semester process of 
macroeconomic coordination to integrate the United Nations’ sustainable development 
goals, to put sustainability and the well-being of citizens at the centre of economic 
policy, and the sustainable development goals at the heart of the EU’s policymaking and 
action. 
The figure below illustrates the various elements of the Green Deal. 
 
Figure 1: The European Green Deal 
 
2 In line with the findings of the 2020 European environment - state and outlook 2020: knowledge for 
transition to a sustainable Europe (European Environment Agency) 
3  
4 See Political Guidelines of President elect Ursula von der Leyen: Political guidelines for the next 
Commission (2019 -2024) - ‘A Union that strives for more: My agenda for Europe’ : 

4 2. TRANSFORMING THE EU’ S ECONOMY FOR A SUST AINABLE FUTURE 
2.1. Designing a set of deeply transformative policies 
To deliver the European Green Deal, there is a need to rethink policies for clean energy 
supply across the economy, industry, prod uction and consumption, large -scale 
infrastructure, transport, food and agriculture, construction, taxation and social benefits. 
To achieve these aims, it is essential to increase the value given to protecting and 
restoring natural ecosystems, to the susta inable use of resources and to improving human 
health. This is where transformational change is most needed and potentially most 
beneficial for the EU economy, society and natural environment. The EU should also 
promote and invest in the necessary digital transformation and tools as these are essential 
enablers of the changes. 
While all of these areas for action are strongly interlinked and mutually reinforcing, 
careful attention will have to be paid when there are potential trade -offs between 
economic, en vironmental and social objectives. The Green Deal will make consistent use 
of all policy levers: regulation and standardisation, investment and innovation, national 
reforms, dialogue with social partners and international cooperation. The European Pillar 
of Social Rights will guide action in ensuring that no one is left behind. 
New measures on their own will not be enough to achieve the European Green 
Deal’s objectives. In addition to launching new initiatives, t he Commission will work 
with the Member Stat es to step up the EU’s efforts to ensure that current legislation and 
policies relevant to the Green Deal are enforced and effectively implemented. 
2.1.1. Increasing the EU’s climate ambition for 2030 and 2050 
The Commission has already set out a clear vision of how to achieve climate 
neutrality by 20505. This vision should form the basis for the long -term strategy that the 
EU will submit to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in 
early 2020. To set out clearly the conditions for an effective and fair transition, to provide 
predictability for investors, and to ensure that the transition is irreversible, the 
Commission will propose the first European ‘Climate Law’ by March 2020. This 
will enshrine the 2050 climate neutrality objective in legisl ation. T he Climate Law will 
also ensure that all EU policies contribute to the climate neutrality objective and that all 
sectors play their part. 
The EU has already started to modernise and transform the economy with the aim of 
climate neutrality. Between 1990 and 2018, it reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 
23%, while the economy grew by 61%. However, current policies will only reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 60% by 2050. Much remains to be done, starting with more 
ambitious climate action in the comin g decade. 
By summer 2020, the Commission will present an impact assessed plan to increase the 
EU’s greenhouse gas emission reductions target for 2030 to at least 50% and 
towards 55% compared with 1990 levels in a responsible way. To deliver these 
addition al greenhouse gas emissions reductions, the Commission will, by June 2021, 
review and propose to revise where necessary, all relevant climate -related policy 
 
5 A Clean Planet for all - A European strategic long -term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive 
and climate neutral economy COM (2018) 773 
 
5 instruments. This will comprise the Emissions Trading System6, including a possible 
extension of Eu ropean emissions trading to new sectors, Member State targets to reduce 
emissions in sectors outside the Emissions Trading System7, and the regulation on land 
use, land use change and forestry8. The Commission will propose to amend the Climate 
Law to updat e it accordingly. 
These policy reforms will help to ensure effective carbon pricing throughout the 
economy . This will encourage changes in consumer and business behaviour, and 
facilitate an increase in sustainable public and private investment. The diffe rent pricing 
instruments must complement each other and jointly provide a coherent policy 
framework. Ensuring that taxation is aligned with climate objectives is also essential. The 
Commission will propose to revise the Energy Taxation Directive9, focusing on 
environmental issues, and proposing to use the provisions in the Treaties that allow the 
European Parliament and the Council to adopt proposals in this area through the ordinary 
legislative procedure by qualified majority voting rather than by unanimit y. 
As long as many international partners do not share the same ambition as the EU, 
there is a risk of carbon leakage, either because production is transferred from the EU to 
other countries with lower ambition for emission reduction, or because EU produc ts are 
replaced by more carbon -intensive imports. If this risk materialises, there will be no 
reduction in global emissions, and this will frustrate the efforts of the EU and its 
industries to meet the global climate objectives of the Paris Agreement. 
Should differences in levels of ambition worldwide persist, as the EU increases its 
climate ambition, the Commission will propose a carbon border adjustment 
mechanism, for selected sectors, to reduce the risk of carbon leakage. This would 
ensure that the p rice of imports reflect more accurately their carbon content. This 
measure will be designed to comply with World Trade Organization rules and other 
international obligations of the EU. It would be an alternative to the measures10 that 
address the risk of ca rbon leakage in the EU’s Emissions Trading System. 
The Commission will adopt a new, more ambitious EU strategy on adaptation to 
climate change. This is essential, as climate change will continue to create significant 
stress in Europe in spite of the mitig ation efforts. Strengthening the efforts on climate -
proofing, resilience building, prevention and preparedness is crucial. Work on climate 
adaptation should continue to influence public and private investments , including on 
nature -based solutions. It will be important to ensure that across the EU, investors, 
insurers, businesses, cities and citizens are able to access data and to develop instruments 
to integrate climate change into their risk management practices. 
 
6 Consolidated version of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 
establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and 
amending Council Directive 96/61/EC 
7 Regulation (EU) 2018/842 on binding annual greenhouse gas emission reductions by Member States 
from 2021 to 2030 contributing to climate action to meet commitments under the Paris Agreement and 
amen ding Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 
8 Regulation (EU) 2018/841 on the inclusion of greenhouse gas emissions and removals from land use, 
land use change and forestry in the 2030 climate and energy framework, and amending Regulation 
(EU) No 525/2013 and Decisi on No 529/2013/EU 
9 Council Directive 2003/96/EC restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy 
products and electricity 
10 Such as the free allocation of emission allowances or compensation for the increase in electricity costs 
 
6 2.1.2. Supplying clean, affordable and secure ene rgy 
Further decarbonising the energy system is critical to reach climate objectives in 
2030 and 2050. The production and use of energy across economic sectors account for 
more than 75% of the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions. Energy efficiency must be 
prioritised. A power sector must be developed that is based largely on renewable 
sources, complemented by the rapid phasing out of coal and decarbonising gas. At the 
same time, the EU's energy supply needs to be secure and affordable for consumers and 
businesses. For this to happen, it is essential to ensure that the European energy market is 
fully integrated, interconnected and digitalised, while respecting technological neutrality. 
Member States will present their revised energy and climate plans by th e end of 
2019 . In line with the Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate 
Action11, these plans should set out ambitious national contributions to EU -wide targets. 
The Commission will assess the ambition of the plans, and the need for add itional 
measures if the level of ambition is not sufficient. This will feed into the process of 
increasing climate ambition for 2030, for which the Commission will review and propose 
to revise, where necessary, the relevant energy legislation by June 2021. When Member 
States begin updating their national energy and climate plans in 2023, they should reflect 
the new climate ambition. The Commission will continue to ensure that all relevant 
legislation is rigorously enforced. 
The clean energy transition shoul d involve and benefit consumers. Renewable energy 
sources will have an essential role. Increasing offshore wind production will be essential, 
building on regional cooperation between Member States. The smart integration of 
renewables, energy efficiency and other sustainable solutions across sectors will help to 
achieve decarbonisation at the lowest possible cost. The rapid decrease in the cost of 
renewables, combined with improved design of support policies, has already reduced the 
impact on households’ ene rgy bills of renewables deployment. The Commission will 
present by mid -2020 measures to help achieve smart integration. In parallel, the 
decarbonis ation of the gas sector will be facilitated, including via enhancing support for 
the development of decarboni sed gases, via a forward -looking design for a competitive 
decarbonised gas market, and by address ing the issue of energy -related methane 
emissions. 
The risk of energy poverty must be addressed for households that cannot afford key 
energy services to ensur e a basic standard of living. Effective programmes, such as 
financing schemes for households to renovate their houses, can reduce energy bills and 
help the environment. In 2020, the Commission will produce guidance to assist Member 
States in addressing the issue of energy poverty. 
The transition to climate neutrality also requires smart infrastructure. Increased 
cross -border and regional cooperation will help achieve the benefits of the clean energy 
transition at affordable prices. The regulatory framework for energy infrastructure, 
including the TEN -E Regulation12, will need to be reviewed to ensure consistency with 
the climate neutrality objective. This framework should foster the deployment of 
innovative technologies and infrastructure, such as smart grids, hydrogen networks or 
carbon capture, storage and utilisation, energy storage, also enabling sector integration. 
Some existing infrastructure and assets will require upgrading to remain fit for purpose 
and climate resilient. 
 
11 Regul ation (EU) 2018/1999 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action 
12 Trans -European Networks - Energy (TEN -E) Regulation 
 
7 2.1.3. Mobilising industry for a cl ean and circular economy 
Achieving a climate neutral and circular economy requires the full mobilisation of 
industry. It takes 25 years - a generation - to transform an industrial sector and all the 
value chains. To be ready in 2050, decisions and actions need to be taken in the next five 
years. 
From 1970 to 2017, the annual global extraction of materials tripled and it continues to 
grow13, posing a major global risk. About half of total greenhouse gas emissions and 
more than 90% of biodiversity loss and w ater stress come from resource extraction and 
processing of materials, fuels and food. The EU’s industry has started the shift but still 
accounts for 20% of the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions. It remains too ‘linear’, and 
dependent on a throughput of new materials extracted, traded and processed into goods, 
and finally disposed of as waste or emissions. Only 12% of the materials it uses come 
from recycling14. 
The transition is an opportunity to expand sustainable and job -intensive economic 
activity . There i s significant potential in global markets for low -emission technologies, 
sustainable products and services. Likewise, the circular economy offers great potential 
for new activities and jobs. However, the transformation is taking place at a too slow 
pace wi th progress neither widespread nor uniform. The European Green Deal will 
support and accelerate the EU’s industry transition to a sustainable model of inclusive 
growth. 
In March 2020, the Commission will adopt an EU industrial strategy to address the 
twin challenge of the green and the digital transformation. Europe must leverage the 
potential of the digital transformation, which is a key enabler for reaching the Green Deal 
objectives. Together with the industrial strategy, a new circular economy action pla n 
will help modernise the EU’s economy and draw benefit from the opportunities of the 
circular economy domestically and globally. A key aim of the new policy framework will 
be to stimulate the development of lead markets for climate neutral and circular pr oducts, 
in the EU and beyond. 
Energy -intensive industries, such as steel, chemicals and cement, are indispensable 
to Europe’s economy, as they supply several key value chains. The decarbonisation 
and modernisation of this sector is essential. The recommen dations published by the 
High Level Group of energy -intensive industries show the industry’s commitment to 
these objectives15. 
The circular economy action plan will include a ‘sustainable products’ policy to 
support the circular design of all products based on a common methodology and 
principles. It will prioritise reducing and reusing materials before recycling them . It will 
foster new business models and set minimum requirements to prevent environmentally 
harmful products from being placed on the EU market. Extended producer responsibility 
will also be strengthened. 
While the circular economy action plan will guide the transition of all sectors, action will 
focus in particular on resource -intensive secto rs such as textiles , construction, 
electronics and plastics . The Commission will follow up on the 2018 plastics strategy 
focusing, among other things, on measures to tackle intentionally added micro plastics 
 
13 Global Resources Outlook 2019 : Natural Reso urces for the Future We Want: The International 
Resource Panel. 
14  de=cei_srm030&plugin=1 
15  
 
8 and unintentional releases of plastics, for exam ple from textiles and tyre abrasion. The 
Commission will develop requirements to ensure that all packaging in the EU market is 
reusable or recyclable in an economically viable manner by 2030, will develop a 
regulatory framework for biodegradable and bio -based plastics, and will implement 
measures on single use plastics. 
The circular economy action plan will also include measures to encourage businesses 
to offer, and to allow consumers to choose, reusable, durable and repairable 
products. It will analyse the need for a ‘right to repair’, and curb the built -in 
obsolescence of devices, in particular for electronics. Consumer policy will help to 
empower consumers to make informed choices and play an active role in the ecological 
transition. New business models b ased on renting and sharing goods and services will 
play a role as long as they are truly sustainable and affordable. 
Reliable, comparable and verifiable information also plays an important part in 
enabling buyers to make more sustainable decisions and re duces the risk of ‘green 
washing’. Companies making ‘green claims’ should substantiate these against a standard 
methodology to assess their impact on the environment. The Commission will step up its 
regulatory and non -regulatory efforts to tackle false gre en claims. Digitalisation can also 
help improve the availability of information on the characteristics of products sold in the 
EU. For instance, an electronic product passport could provide information on a 
product’s origin, composition, repair and dismant ling possibilities, and end of life 
handling. Public authorities, including the EU institutions, should lead by example and 
ensure that their procurement is green. The Commission will propose further legislation 
and guidance on green public purchasing. 
A sustainable product policy also has the potential to reduce waste significantly . 
Where waste cannot be avoided, its economic value must be recovered and its impact on 
the environment and on climate change avoided or minimised. This requires new 
legislation, including targets and measures for tackling over -packaging and waste 
generation. In parallel, EU companies should benefit from a robust and integrated single 
market for secondary raw materials and by -products. This requires deeper cooperation 
across value chains, as in the case of the Circular Plastics Alliance. The Commission will 
consider legal requirements to boost the market of secondary raw materials with 
mandatory recycled content (for instance for packaging, vehicles, construction materials 
and batt eries). To simplify waste management for citizens and ensure cleaner secondary 
materials for businesses, the Commission will also propose an EU model for separate 
waste collection. The Commission is of the view that the EU should stop exporting its 
waste o utside of the EU and will therefore revisit the rules on waste shipments and illegal 
exports. 
Access to resources is also a strategic security question for Europe’s ambition to 
deliver the Green Deal . Ensuring the supply of sustainable raw materials, in pa rticular 
of critical raw materials necessary for clean technologies, digital, space and defence 
applications, by diversifying supply from both primary and secondary sources, is 
therefore one of the pre -requisites to make this transition happen. 
EU industr y needs ‘climate and resource frontrunners’ to develop the first commercial 
applications of breakthrough technologies in key industrial sectors by 2030. Priority 
areas include clean hydrogen, fuel cells and other alternative fuels, energy storage, and 
carbon capture, storage and utilisation. As an example, the Commission will support 
clean steel breakthrough technologies leading to a zero -carbon steel making process by 
2030 and will explore whether part of the funding being liquidated under the European 
 
9 Coal and Steel Community can be used. More broadly, the EU Emissions Trading 
System Innovation Fund will help to deploy such large -scale innovative projects. 
Promoting new forms of collaboration with industry and investments in strategic 
value chains are ess ential. The Commission will continue to implement the Strategic 
Action Plan on Batteries and support the European Battery Alliance. It will propose 
legislation in 2020 to ensure a safe, circular and sustainable battery value chain for all 
batteries, includ ing to supply the growing market of electric vehicles. The Commission 
will also support other initiatives leading to alliances and to a large -scale pooling of 
resources, for example in the form of Important Projects of Common European Interest, 
where targe ted time -bound State aid can help build new innovative value chains. 
Digital technologies are a critical enabler for attaining the sustainability goals of the 
Green deal in many different sectors. The Commission will explore measures to ensure 
that digita l technologies such as artificial intelligence, 5G, cloud and edge computing and 
the internet of things can accelerate and maximise the impact of policies to deal with 
climate change and protect the environment. Digitalisation also presents new 
opportuniti es for distance monitoring of air and water pollution, or for monitoring and 
optimising how energy and natural resources are used. At the same time, Europe needs a 
digital sector that puts sustainability at its heart. The Commission will also consider 
meas ures to improve the energy efficiency and circular economy performance of the 
sector itself, from broadband networks to data centres and ICT devices. The Commission 
will assess the need for more transparency on the environmental impact of electronic 
commun ication services, more stringent measures when deploying new networks and the 
benefits of supporting ‘take -back’ schemes to incentivise people to return their unwanted 
devices such as mobile phones, tablets and chargers. 
2.1.4. Building and renovating in an energ y and resource efficient way 
The construction, use and renovation of buildings require significant amounts of 
energy and mineral resources (e.g. sand, gravel, cement). Buildings also account for 
40% of energy consumed. Today the annual renovation rate of t he building stock varies 
from 0.4 to 1.2% in the Member States. This rate will need at least to double to reach the 
EU’s energy efficiency and climate objectives. In parallel, 50 million consumers struggle 
to keep their homes adequately warm. 
To address t he twin challenge of energy efficiency and affordability, the EU and the 
Member States should engage in a ‘renovation wave’ of public and private buildings. 
While increasing renovation rates is a challenge, renovation lowers energy bills, and can 
reduce en ergy poverty. It can also boost the construction sector and is an opportunity to 
support SMEs and local jobs. 
The Commission will rigorously enforce the legislation related to the energy 
performance of buildings . This will start with an assessment in 2020 of Member States’ 
national long -term renovation strategies16. The Commission will also launch work on the 
possibility of including emissions from buildings in European emissions trading, as part 
of broader efforts to ensure that the relative prices of diff erent energy sources provide the 
right signals for energy efficiency. In addition, the Commission will review the 
Construction Products Regulation17. It should ensure that the design of new and 
 
16 As part of the requirements under the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 
17 Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction 
products and repealing Council Directive 89/106/EEC 
 
10 renovated buildings at all stages is in line with the needs of the circular economy, and 
lead to increased digitalisation and climate -proofing of the building stock. 
In parallel, the Commission proposes to work with stakeholders on a new initiative 
on renovation in 2020 . This will include an open platform bringing tog ether the 
buildings and construction sector, architects and engineers and local authorities to 
address the barriers to renovation. This initiative will also include innovative financing 
schemes under InvestEU. These could target housing associations or ene rgy service 
companies that could roll out renovation including through energy performance 
contracting. An essential aim would be to organise renovation efforts into larger blocks 
to benefit from better financing conditions and economies of scale. The Commi ssion will 
also work to lift national regulatory barriers that inhibit energy efficiency investments in 
rented and multi -ownership buildings. Particular attention will be paid to the renovation 
of social housing, to help households who struggle to pay thei r energy bills. Focus should 
also be put on renovating schools and hospitals, as the money saved through building 
efficiency will be money available to support education and public health. 
2.1.5. Accelerating the shift to sustainable and smart mobility 
Transport accounts for a quarter of the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions, and still 
growing. To achieve climate neutrality, a 90% reduction in transport emissions is needed 
by 2050. Road, rail, aviation, and waterborne transport will all have to contribute to the 
reduction. Achieving sustainable transport means putting users first and providing them 
with more affordable, accessible, healthier and cleaner alternatives to their current 
mobility habits. The Commission will adopt a strategy for sustainable and sma rt mobility 
in 2020 that will address this challenge and tackle all emission sources. 
Multimodal transport needs a strong boost. This will increase the efficiency of the 
transport system. As a matter of priority, a substantial part of the 75% of inland fr eight 
carried today by road should shift onto rail and inland waterways. This will require 
measures to manage better, and to increase the capacity of railways and inland 
waterways, which the Commission will propose by 2021. The Commission will also 
conside r withdrawing and presenting a new proposal to revise the Combined Transport 
Directive18 to turn it into an effective tool to support multimodal freight operations 
involving rail and waterborne transport, including short -sea shipping. In aviation, work 
on adopting the Commission’s proposal on a truly Single European Sky will need to 
restart, as this will help achieve significant reductions in aviation emissions. 
Automated and connected multimodal mobility will play an increasing role, together 
with smart tra ffic management systems enabled by digitalisation. The EU transport 
system and infrastructure will be made fit to support new sustainable mobility services 
that can reduce congestion and pollution, especially in urban areas. The Commission will 
help develo p smart systems for traffic management and ‘Mobility as a Service’ solutions, 
through its funding instruments, such as the Connected Europe Facility. 
The price of transport must reflect the impact it has on the environment and on 
health. Fossil -fuel subsid ies should end and, in the context of the revision of the Energy 
Taxation Directive, the Commission will look closely at the current tax exemptions 
including for aviation and maritime fuels and at how best to close any loopholes. 
 
18 Proposal for a directive amending Directive 92/106/EEC on the establishment of common rules for 
certain types of combined transport of goods between Member States COM(2017) 648 
 
11 Similarly, the Commission will propose to extend European emissions trading to the 
maritime sector, and to reduce the EU Emissions Trading System allowances allocated 
for free to airlines. This will be coordinated with action at global level, notably at the 
International Civil Avia tion Organization and International Maritime Organization. The 
Commission will also give fresh political consideration as to how to achieve effective 
road pricing in the EU. It calls on the European Parliament and the Council to maintain 
the high level of ambition in the Commission’s original proposal for the ‘Eurovignette’ 
Directive19, and is ready to withdraw it if necessary and to propose alternative measures. 
The EU should in parallel ramp -up the production and deployment of sustainable 
alternative tran sport fuels. By 2025, about 1 million public recharging and refuelling 
stations will be needed for the 13 million zero - and low -emission vehicles expected on 
European roads. The Commission will support the deployment of public recharging and 
refuelling poi nts where persistent gaps exist, notably for long -distance travel and in less 
densely populated areas, and will launch as quickly as possible a new funding call to 
support this. These steps will complement the measures taken at national level. The 
Commissi on will consider legislative options to boost the production and uptake of 
sustainable alternative fuels for the different transport modes. The Commission will also 
review the Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Directive20 and the TEN -T Regulation to 
accelera te the deployment of zero - and low -emission vehicles and vessels. 
Transport should become drastically less polluting, especially in cities . A 
combination of measures should address emissions, urban congestion, and improved 
public transport. The Commission will propose more stringent air pollutant emissions 
standards for combustion -engine vehicles. The Commission will also propose to revise 
by June 2021 the legislation on CO 2 emission performance standards for cars and vans, 
to ensure a clear pathway from 2025 onwards towards zero -emission mobility. In 
parallel, it will consider applying European emissions trading to road transport, as a 
complement to existing and future CO 2 emission performance standards for vehicles. It 
will take action in re lation to maritime transport, including to regulate access of the most 
polluting ships to EU ports and to oblige docked ships to use shore -side electricity. 
Similarly, air quality should be improved near airports by tackling the emissions of 
pollutants by aeroplanes and airport operations. 
2.1.6. From ‘Farm to Fork’: designing a fair, healthy and 
environmentally -friendly food system 
European food is famous for being safe, nutritious and of high quality. It should now 
also become the global standard for sustaina bility. Although the transition to more 
sustainable systems has started, feeding a fast -growing world population remains a 
challenge with current production patterns. Food production still results in air, water and 
soil pollution, contributes to the loss o f biodiversity and climate change, and consumes 
excessive amounts of natural resources, while an important part of food is wasted. At the 
same time, low quality diets contribute to obesity and diseases such as cancer. 
There are new opportunities for all o perators in the food value chain. New 
technologies and scientific discoveries, combined with increasing public awareness and 
demand for sustainable food, will benefit all stakeholders. The Commission will present 
 
19 Proposal for a directive amending Directive 1999/62/EC on the charging of heavy goods vehicles for 
the use of certain infrastructure COM(2017) 275 
20 Directive 2014/94/EU on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure 
 
12 the ‘Farm to Fork’ Strategy in spring 2020 and launch a broad stakeholder debate 
covering all the stages of the food chain, and paving the way to formulating a more 
sustainable food policy. 
European farmers and fishermen are key to managing the transition. The Farm to 
Fork Strategy will strengthen their efforts to tackle climate change, protect the 
environment and preserve biodiversity. The common agricultural and common fisheries 
policies will remain key tools to support these efforts while ensuring a decent living for 
farmers, fishermen and their families. The Commission’s proposals for the common 
agricultural policy for 2021 to 2027 stipulate that at least 40% of the common 
agricultural policy’s overall budget and at least 30% of the Maritime Fisheries Fund 
would contribute to climate action. 
The Commission will work with the European Parliament and the Council to achieve at 
least this level of ambition in the proposals. Given that the start of the revised 
Common Agricultural Policy is likely to be delayed to the beginning of 2022, the 
Commissi on will work with the Member States and stakeholders to ensure that from the 
outset the national strategic plans for agriculture fully reflect the ambition of the Green 
Deal and the Farm to Fork Strategy. The Commission will ensure that these strategic 
plans are assessed against robust climate and environmental criteria. These plans should 
lead to the use of sustainable practices, such as precision agriculture, organic farming, 
agro-ecology, agro -forestry and stricter animal welfare standards. By shifting t he focus 
from compliance to performance, measures such as eco -schemes should reward farmers 
for improved environmental and climate performance, including managing and storing 
carbon in the soil, and improved nutrient management to improve water quality and 
reduce emissions. The Commission will work with the Member States to develop the 
potential of sustainable seafood as a source of low -carbon food. 
The strategic plans will need to reflect an increased level of ambition to reduce 
significantly the use and risk of chemical pesticides, as well as the use of fertilisers 
and antibiotics . The Commission will identify the measures, including legislative, 
needed to bring about these reductions based on a stakeholder dialogue. The area under 
organic farming will al so need to increase in Europe. The EU needs to develop 
innovative ways to protect harvests from pests and diseases and to consider the potential 
role of new innovative techniques to improve the sustainability of the food system, while 
ensuring that they ar e safe. 
The Farm to Fork Strategy will also contribute to achieving a circular economy. It 
will aim to reduce the environmental impact of the food processing and retail sectors by 
taking action on transport, storage, packaging and food waste. This will in clude actions 
to combat food fraud, including strengthening enforcement and investigative capacity at 
EU level, and to launch a process to identify new innovative food and feed products, such 
as seafood based on algae. 
Lastly, the Farm to Fork Strategy wi ll strive to stimulate sustainable food consumption 
and promote affordable healthy food for all. Imported food that does not comply with 
relevant EU environmental standards is not allowed on EU markets. The Commission 
will propose actions to help consumers choose healthy and sustainable diets and reduce 
food waste. The Commission will explore new ways to give consumers better 
information, including by digital means, on details such as where the food comes from, 
its nutritional value, and its environmental f ootprint. The Farm to Fork strategy will also 
contain proposals to improve the position of farmers in the value chain. 
 
13 2.1.7. Preserving and restoring ecosystems and biodiversity 
Ecosystems provide essential services such as food, fresh water and clean air, and 
shelter. They mitigate natural disasters, pests and diseases and help regulate the climate. 
However, the EU is not meeting some of its most important environmental objectives for 
2020, such as the Aichi targets under the Convention on Biological Diversity. The EU 
and its global partners need to halt biodiversity loss . The Intergovernmental Science -
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services’ 2019 Global Assessment 
Report21 showed worldwide erosion of biodiversity, caused primarily by changes in how 
land and sea are used, direct exploitation of natural resources, and with climate change as 
the third most important driver of biodiversity loss. 
The Conference of the Parties t o the Convention on Biological Diversity in Kunming, 
China, in October 2020 is an opportunity for the world to adopt a robust global 
framework to halt biodiversity loss. To ensure that the EU plays a key role, the 
Commission will present a Biodiversity Str ategy by March 2020 , to be followed up by 
specific action in 2021. The strategy will outline the EU’s position for the Conference of 
the Parties, with global targets to protect biodiversity, as well as commitments to address 
the main causes of biodiversity loss in the EU, underpinned by measurable objectives 
that address the main causes of biodiversity loss. 
The biodiversity strategy will identify specific measures to meet these objectives. 
These could include quantified objectives, such as increasing the coverage of protected 
biodiversity -rich land and sea areas building on the Natura 2000 network. Member States 
should also reinforce cross -border cooperation to protect and restore more effectively the 
areas covered by the Natura 2000 network. The Commissio n will identify which 
measures, including legislation, would help Member States improve and restore damaged 
ecosystems to good ecological status, including carbon -rich ecosystems. The biodiversity 
strategy will also include proposals to green European citi es and increase biodiversity in 

look at how provide funding to help Member States to reach this aim. 
All EU policies should contribute to preserving and restoring Europ e’s natural 
capital22. The Farm to Fork Strategy, outlined in section 2.1.6, will address the use of 
pesticides and fertilisers in agriculture. Work will continue under the common fisheries 
policy to reduce the adverse impacts that fishing can have on ecosy stems, especially in 
sensitive areas. The Commission will also support more connected and well -managed 
marine protected areas. 
Forest ecosystems are under increasing pressure, as a result of climate change . The 
EU’s forested area needs to improve, both in quality and quantity, for the EU to 
reach climate neutrality and a healthy environment. Sustainable re - and afforestation and 
the restoration of degraded forests can increase absorption of CO 2 while improvin g the 
resilience of forests and promoting the circular bio -economy. Building on the 2030 
biodiversity strategy , the Commission will prepare a new EU forest strategy covering the 
whole forest cycle and promoting the many services that forests provide. 
The new EU forest strategy will have as its key objectives effective afforestation, 
and forest preservation and restoration in Europe , to help to increase the absorption 
of CO 2,, reduce the incidence and extent of forest fires, and promote the bio -economy, in 
 
21  -global -assessment -preview 
22 EU guidelines SWD (2019)305 FINAL “EU guidance on integrating ecosystems and their services 
into decision -making” 
 
14 full respect for ecological principles favourable to biodiversity. The national strategic 
plans under the common agricultural policy should incentivise forest managers to 
preserve, grow and manage forests sustainably . Building on the Communication on 
Stepping up EU Action to Protect and Restore the World’s Forests23, the Commission 
will take measures, both regulatory and otherwise, to promote imported products and 
value chains that do not involve deforestation and forest degradation. 
A sustainable ‘blue eco nomy’ will have to play a central role in alleviating the 
multiple demands on the EU's land resources and tackling climate change. The role of 
oceans in mitigating and adapting to climate change is increasingly recognised. The 
sector can contribute by impr oving the use of aquatic and marine resources and, for 
example, by promoting the production and use of new sources of protein that can relieve 
pressure on agricultural land. More generally, lasting solutions to climate change require 
greater attention to n ature -based solutions including healthy and resilient seas and 
oceans. The Commission will analyse the findings of the International Panel on Climate 
Change special report on oceans24 and propose measures in the maritime area. This will 
include ways to mana ge maritime space more sustainably, notably to help tap into the 
growing potential of offshore renewable energy. The Commission will also take a zero -
tolerance approach to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. The 2020 United 
Nations Ocean Conferenc e in Portugal will be an opportunity for the EU to highlight the 
importance of action on ocean issues . 
2.1.8. A zero pollution ambition for a toxic -free environment 
Creating a toxic -free environment requires more action to prevent pollution from 
being generated as well as measures to clean and remedy it. To protect Europe’s 
citizens and ecosystems, the EU needs to better monitor, report, prevent and remedy 
pollution from air, water, soil, and consumer products. To achieve this, t he EU and 
Member Stat es will need to look more systematically at all policies and regulations. To 
address these interlinked challenges, the Commission will adopt in 2021 a zero 
pollution action plan for air, water and soil. 
The natural functions of ground and surface water mu st be restored. This is 
essential to preserve and restore biodiversity in lakes, rivers, wetlands and estuaries, and 
to prevent and limit damage from floods. Implementing the ‘Farm to Fork’ strategy will 
reduce pollution from excess nutrients. In addition, the Commission will propose 
measures to address pollution from urban runoff and from new or particularly harmful 
sources of pollution such as micro plastics and chemicals, including pharmaceuticals. 
There is also a need to address the combined effects of different pollutants. 
The Commission will draw on the lessons learnt from the evaluation of the current 
air quality legislation25. It will also propose to strengthen provisions on monitoring26, 
modelling and air quality plans to help local authorities achieve cleaner air. The 
Commission will notably propose to revise air quality standards to align them more 
closely with the World Health Organization recommendations. 
The Commission will review EU measures to address pollution from large industrial 
installations. It will look at the sectoral scope of the legislation and at how to make it 
 
23 COM/2019/352 final 
24 Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate 
25 Fitness check of the Ambient Air Quality Direct ives SWD(2019) 427 
26 Including by making use of new monitoring opportunities provided by digitalisation 
 
15 fully consistent with climate, energy and circular economy policies. The Commission 
will also work with Member States to improve the prevention of industrial accidents. 
To ensure a toxic -free environment, the Commission will present a chemicals 
strategy for sustainability. This will both help to protect citizens and the environment 
better against hazardous chemic als and encourage innovation for the development of safe 
and sustainable alternatives. All parties including industry should work together to 
combine better health and environmental protection and increased global 
competitiveness. This can be achieved by s implifying and strengthening the legal 
framework. The Commission will review how to use better the EU’s agencies and 
scientific bodies to move towards a process of ‘one substance - one assessment’ and to 
provide greater transparency when prioritising actio n to deal with chemicals. In parallel, 
the regulatory framework will need to rapidly reflect scientific evidence on the risk posed 
by endocrine disruptors, hazardous chemicals in products including imports, combination 
effects of different chemicals and ve ry persistent chemicals. 
2.2. Mainstreaming sustainability in all EU policies 
2.2.1. Pursuing green finance and investment and ensuring a just transition 
To achieve the ambition set by the European Green Deal, there are significant 
investment needs . The Commission h as estimated that achieving the current 2030 
climate and energy targets will require €260 billion of additional annual investment27, 
about 1.5% of 2018 GDP28. This flow of investment will need to be sustained over time. 
The magnitude of the investment challenge requires mobilising both the public and 
private sector. 
The Commission will present a Sustainable Europe Investment Plan to help meet the 
additional funding needs. It will combine dedicated financing to support s ustainable 
investments, and proposals for an improved enabling framework that is conducive to 
green investment. At the same time, it will be essential to prepare a pipeline of 
sustainable projects. Technical assistance and advisory services will help proje ct 
promoters to identify and prepare projects and to access sources of finance. 
The EU budget will play a key role . The Commission has proposed a 25% target for 
climate mainstreaming across all EU programmes. The EU budget will also contribute to 
achieving climate objectives on the revenue side. The Commission has proposed new 
revenue streams (“Own Resources”), one of which is based on the non -recycled plastic -
packaging waste. A second revenue stream could involve allocating 20% of the revenue 
from the auct ioning of EU Emissions Trading System to the EU budget. 
At least 30% of the InvestEU Fund will contribute to fighting climate change . 
Moreover, projects will be subject to sustainability proofing to screen the contribution 
that they make to climate, envir onmental and social objectives. InvestEU also offers 
Member States the option to use the EU budgetary guarantee e.g. to deliver on climate -
related cohesion policy objectives in their territories and regions. InvestEU also 
strengthens cooperation with natio nal promotional banks and institutions, which can 
encourage an overall greening of their activities to deliver on EU policy objectives. 
 
27 Communication “United in delivering the Energy Union and Climate Action - Setting the foundations 
for a successful clean energy transition” COM(2019 ) 285 
28 These estimates are conservative, as they do not consider, for instance, the investment needs for 
climate adaptation or for other environmental challenges, such as biodiversity. They also exclude the 
public investment needed to address the social costs of the transition and the costs of inaction 
 
16 Moreover, as part of the revision of the EU Emission Trading System, the Commission 
will review the role of the Innovati on and Modernisation Funds, which are not financed 
by the EU’s long -term budget. The ambition will be to strengthen their role and their 
effectiveness in deploying innovative and climate neutral solutions across the EU. In the 
revision of the EU Emissions Trading System, the allocation of additional revenues from 
allowances to the EU budget with a view to strengthening the financing of the just 
transition will also be considered. 
The Commission will also work with the European Investment Bank (EIB) Group, 
national promotional banks and institutions, as well as with other international financial 
institutions. The EIB set itself the target of doubling its climate target from 25% to 50% 
by 2025, thus becoming Europe’s climate bank. 
As part of the Sustainable Europe Investment Plan, the Commission will propose a 
Just Transition Mechanism, including a Just Transition Fund, to leave no one 
behind. The transition can only succeed if it is conducted in a fair and inclusive way. 
The most vulnerable are the most expo sed to the harmful effects of climate change and 
environmental degradation. At the same time, managing the transition will lead to 
significant structural changes in business models, skill requirements and relative prices. 
Citizens, depending on their socia l and geographic circumstances, will be affected in 
different ways. Not all Member States, regions and cities start the transition from the 
same point or have the same capacity to respond. These challenges require a strong 
policy response at all levels. 
The Just Transition Mechanism will focus on the regions and sectors that are most 
affected by the transition because they depend on fossil fuels or carbon -intensive 
processes. It will draw on sources of funding from the EU budget as well as the EIB 
group t o leverage the necessary private and public resources. Support will be linked to 
promoting a transition towards low -carbon and climate -resilient activities. It will also 
strive to protect the citizens and workers most vulnerable to the transition, providin g 
access to re -skilling programmes, jobs in new economic sectors, or energy -efficient 
housing. The Commission will work with the Member States and regions to help them 
put in place territorial transition plans. 
The mechanism will come in addition to the su bstantial contribution of the EU’s 
budget through all programmes directly relevant to the transition, as well as other funds 
such as the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund Plus . 
In order to bring an answer to the long -term fin ancing needs of the transition , the 
Commission will continue to explore with relevant partners, as part of the Sustainable 
Europe Investment Plan, additional sources that could be mobilised and innovative ways 
to do so. 
The need for a socially just transi tion must also be reflected in policies at EU and 
national level. This includes investment to provide affordable solutions to those affected 
by carbon pricing policies, for example through public transport, as well as measures to 
address energy poverty and promote re -skilling. Coherence of climate and environment 
policies and a holistic approach are often a precondition for ensuring they are perceived 
as fair, as illustrated by the debate on taxation of various modes of transport. For 
companies and their wo rkers, an active social dialogue helps to anticipate and 
successfully manage change. The European Semester process of macroeconomic 
coordination will support national policies on these issues . 
The private sector will be key to financing the green transitio n. Long -term signals are 
needed to direct financial and capital flows to green investment and to avoid stranded 
 
17 assets. The Commission will present a renewed sustainable finance strategy in the third 
quarter of 2020 that will focus on a number of actions. 
First, the strategy will strengthen the foundations for sustainable investment. This 
will require notably that the European Parliament and Council adopt the taxonomy for 
classifying environmentally sustainable activities. Sustainability should be further 
embedded into the corporate governance framework, as many companies still focus too 
much on short -term financial performance compared to their long -term development and 
sustainability aspects. At the same time, companies and financial institutions will nee d to 
increase their disclosure on climate and environmental data so that investors are fully 
informed about the sustainability of their investments. To this end, the Commission will 
review the Non -Financial Reporting Directive. To ensure appropriate manage ment of 
environmental risks and mitigation opportunities, and reduce related transaction costs, 
the Commission will also support businesses and other stakeholders in developing 
standardised natural capital accounting practices within the EU and internation ally. 
Second, increased opportunities will be provided for investors and companies by 
making it easier for them to identify sustainable investments and ensuring that they 
are credible. This could be done via clear labels for retail investment products and by 
developing an EU green bond standard that facilitates sustainable investment in the most 
convenient way. 
Third, climate and environmental risks will be managed and integrated into the 
financial system. This means better integrating such risks into the E U prudential 
framework and assessing the suitability of the existing capital requirements for green 
assets. We will also examine how our financial system can help to increase resilience to 
climate and environmental risks, in particular when it comes to the physical risks and 
damage arising from natural catastrophes. 
2.2.2. Greening national budgets and sending the right price signals 
National budgets play a key role in the transition. A greater use of green budgeting 
tools will help to redirect public investment, consumption and taxation to green priorities 
and away from harmful subsidies. The Commission will work with the Member States to 
screen and benchmark green budgeting practices. This will make it easier to assess to 
what extent annual budgets and medium -term fiscal plans take environmental 
considerations and risks into account, and learn from best practices. The review of the 
European economic governance framework will include a reference to green public 
investment in the context of the quality of public fi nance. This will inform a debate on 
how to improve EU fiscal governance. The outcome of the debate will form the basis for 
any possible future steps including how to treat green investments within EU fiscal rules, 
while preserving safeguards against risks to debt sustainability. 
Well -designed tax reforms can boost economic growth and resilience to climate 
shocks and help contribute to a fairer society and to a just transition. They play a 
direct role by sending the right price signals and provid ing the right incentives for 
sustainable behaviour by producers, users and consumers. At national level, the European 
Green Deal will create the context for broad -based tax reforms, removing subsidies for 
fossil fuels, shifting the tax burden from labour t o pollution, and taking into account 
social considerations. There is a need to ensure rapid adoption of the Commission’s 
proposal on value added tax (V AT) rates currently on the table of the Council, so that 
Member States can make a more targeted use of V A T rates to reflect increased 
environmental ambitions, for example to support organic fruit and vegetables. 
 
18 Evaluations are underway of the relevant State aid guidelines including the 
environmental and energy State aid guidelines. The guidelines will be r evised by 2021 
to reflect the policy objectives of the European Green Deal, supporting a cost -effective 
transition to climate neutrality by 2050, and will facilitate the phasing out of fossil fuels, 
in particular those that are most polluting, ensuring a l evel-playing field in the internal 
market. These revisions are also an opportunity to address market barriers to the 
deployment of clean products. 
2.2.3. Mobilising research and fostering innovation 
New technologies, sustainable solutions and disruptive innovatio n are critical to 
achieve the objectives of the European Green Deal. To keep its competitive advantage 
in clean technologies, the EU needs to increase significantly the large -scale deployment 
and demonstration of new technologies across sectors and across the single market, 
building new innovative value chains. This challenge is beyond the means of individual 
Member States. Horizon Europe, in synergy with other EU programmes, will play a 
pivotal role in leveraging national public and private investments. At least 35% of the 
budget of Horizon Europe will fund new solutions for climate, which are relevant for 
implementing the Green Deal. 
The full range of instruments available under the Horizon Europe programme will 
support the research and innovation efforts needed. Four ‘Green Deal Missions’ will 
help deliver large -scale changes in areas such as adaptation to climate change, oceans, 
cities and soil. These missions will bring together a wide range of stakeholders including 
regions and citizens. Partnerships w ith industry and Member States will support research 
and innovation on transport, including batteries, clean hydrogen, low -carbon steel 
making, circular bio -based sectors and the built environment. The knowledge and 
innovation communities run by the Europe an Institute of Innovation and Technology will 
continue to promote collaboration among higher education institutions, research 
organisations and companies on climate change, sustainable energy, food for the future, 
and smart, environmentally -friendly and i ntegrated urban transport. The European 
Innovation Council will dedicate funding, equity investment and business acceleration 
services to high potential start -ups and SMEs for them to achieve breakthrough Green 
Deal innovation that can be scaled up rapidly on global markets. 
Conventional approaches will not be sufficient. Emphasising experimentation, and 
working across sectors and disciplines, the EU’s research and innovation agenda will 
take the systemic approach needed to achieve the aims of the Green Dea l. The Horizon 
Europe programme will also involve local communities in working towards a more 
sustainable future, in initiatives that seek to combine societal pull and technology push. 
Accessible and interoperable data are at the heart of data -driven inno vation. This 
data, combined with digital infrastructure (e.g. supercomputers, cloud, ultra -fast 
networks) and artificial intelligence solutions, facilitate evidence -based decisions and 
expand the capacity to understand and tackle environmental challenges. The Commission 
will support work to unlock the full benefits of the digital transformation to support the 
ecological transition. An immediate priority will be to boost the EU’s ability to predict 
and manage environmental disasters. To do this, the Commissi on will bring together 
European scientific and industrial excellence to develop a very high precision digital 
model of the Earth. 
 
19 2.2.4. Activating education and training 
Schools, training institutions and universities are well placed to engage with pupils, 
paren ts, and the wider community on the changes needed for a successful transition. 
The Commission will prepare a European competence framework to help develop and 
assess knowledge, skills and attitudes on climate change and sustainable development. It 
will als o provide support materials and facilitate the exchange of good practices in EU 
networks of teacher -training programmes. 
The Commission has been working to provide Member States with new financial 
resources to make school buildings and operations more sust ainable. It has 
strengthened collaboration with the European Investment Bank and created stronger links 
between structural funds and the new financial instruments with the aim of leveraging € 3 
billion in investment in school infrastructure in 2020. 
Pro-active re -skilling and upskilling are necessary to reap the benefits of the 
ecological transition. The proposed European Social Fund+ will play an important role 
in helping Europe’s workforce to acquire the skills they need to transfer from declining 
sectors to growing sectors and to adapt to new processes. The Skills Agenda and the 
Youth Guarantee will be updated to enhance employability in the green economy. 
2.2.5. A green oath: ‘do no harm’ 
All EU actions and policies should pull together to help the EU achieve a successful 
and just transition towards a sustainable future . The Commission’s better regulation 
tools provide a solid basis for this. Based on public consultations, on the identification of 
the environmental, social and economic impacts, and on analyses of how SMEs are 
affected and innovation fostered or hindered, impact assessments contribute to making 
efficient policy choices at minimum costs, in line with the objectives of the Green Deal. 
Evaluations also systematically assess coherence between current legislation and new 
priorities. 
To support its work to identify and remedy inconsistencies in current legislation, the 
Commission invites stakeholders to use the available platforms29 to simplify 
legislation and identify problematic cases. The Commission w ill consider these 
suggestions when preparing evaluations, impact assessments and legislative proposals for 
the European Green Deal. 
In addition, building on the results of its recent stock taking of better regulation policy, 
the Commission will improve th e way its better regulation guidelines and supporting 
tools address sustainability and innovation issues. The objective is to ensure that all 
Green Deal initiatives achieve their objectives in the most effective and least burdensome 
way and all other EU in itiatives live up to a green oath to ‘do no harm’. To this end, the 
explanatory memorandum accompanying all legislative proposals and delegated acts will 
include a specific section explaining how each initiative upholds this principle. 
 
29 ‘Have Your Say - Lighten the Load’ website:  -regulation/lighten -
load 
 
20 3. THE EU AS A GLOBAL L EADER 
The global challenges of climate change and environmental degradation require a 
global response. The EU will continue to promote and implement ambitious 
environment, climate and energy policies across the world. It will develop a stronger 
‘green deal diplomacy’ focused on convincing and supporting others to take on their 
share of promoting more sustainable development . By setting a credible example, and 
following -up with diplomacy, trade policy, development support and other external 
policies, the EU can be an effective advocate. The Commission and the High 
Representative will work closely with Member States to mobilise all diplomatic channels 
both bilateral and multilateral - including the United Nations, t he G7, G20, the World 
Trade Organization and other relevant international fora. 
The EU will continue to ensure that the Paris Agreement remains the indispensable 
multilateral framework for tackling climate change. As the EU's share of global 
emissions is falling, comparable action and increased efforts by other regions will be 
critical for addressing the global climate challenge in a meaningful way. The debate on 
climate ambition will intensify in the coming months in line with the Paris Agreement 
provisio ns for regular stocktaking and updates. The Conference of Parties in Glasgow in 
2020 will be an important milestone before the global stocktake in 2023. It will assess 
progress towards achieving long -term goals. As it currently stands, it is clear that the 
level of global ambition is insufficient30. The EU will engage more intensely with all 
partners to increase the collective effort and help them to revise and implement their 
nationally determined contributions and devise ambitious long -term strategies. This will 
build on the EU’s own increased ambition as outlined in section 2. 
In parallel, the EU will step up bilateral engagement with partner countries and, 
where necessary, establish innovative forms of engagement. The EU will continue to 
engage with the economies of the G20 that are responsible for 80% of global greenhouse 
gas emissions. Stepping up the level of climate action taken by international partners 
requires tailor -made geographic strategies that reflect different contexts and local needs - 
for example for current and future big emitters, for the least developed countries, and for 
small island developing states . The EU is also working with global partners to 
develop international carbon markets as a key tool to create economic incentives for 
climate action. 
The EU will put emphasis on supporting its immediate neighbours. The ecological 
transition for Europe can only be fully effective if the EU’s immediate neighbourhood 
also takes effective action. Work is underway on a green agenda for the We stern 
Balkans. The Commission and the High Representative are also envisaging a number of 
strong environment, energy and climate partnerships with the Southern Neighbourhood 
and within the Eastern Partnership. 
The 2020 EU-China summits in Beijing and Leipzig will be an opportunity to reinforce 
the partnership between the EU and China on climate and environmental issues, notably 
ahead of the Kunming Biodiversity Conference , and the Conference of Parties in 
Glasgow. 
Likewise, the forthcoming Comprehensive Strategy with Africa , and the 2020 
summit between the African Union and the EU, should make climate and environmental 
 
30 United Nations En vironment emissions gap report 2019 
 
21 issues key strands in relations between the two continents. In particular, the Africa -
Europe Alliance for sustainable investment and jobs will seek to unlock Africa's potential 
to make rapid progress towards a green and circular economy including sustainable 
energy and food systems and smart cities. The EU will strengthen its engagement with 
Africa for the wider deployment and trade of susta inable and clean energy. Renewable 
energy and energy efficiency, for example for clean cooking, are key to closing the 
energy access gap in Africa while delivering the required reduction in CO 2. The EU will 
launch a “NaturAfrica” initiative to tackle biodiversity loss by creating a network of 
protected areas to protect wildlife and offer opportunities in green sectors for local 
populations. 
More generally , the EU will use its diplomatic and financial tools to ensure that 
green alliances are part of it s relations with Africa and other partner countries and 
regions, particularly in Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific. 
The EU should also reinforce current initiatives and engage with third countries on 
cross -cutting climate and environment i ssues . This may include ending global fossil 
fuel subsidies in line with G20 commitments, phasing -out financing by multilateral 
institutions of fossil fuel infrastructure, strengthening sustainable financing, phasing out 
all new coal plant construction, an d action to reduce methane emissions. 
The EU also recognises that the global climate and environmental challenges are a 
significant threat multiplier and a source of instability. The ecological transition will 
reshape geopolitics, including global economic , trade and security interests. This will 
create challenges for a number of states and societies. The EU will work with all partners 
to increase climate and environmental resilience to prevent these challenges from 
becoming sources of conflict, food insecu rity, population displacement and forced 
migration, and support a just transition globally. Climate policy implications should 
become an integral part of the EU’s thinking and action on external issues, including in 
the context of the Common Security and Defence Policy. 
Trade policy can support the EU’s ecological transition. It serves as a platform to 
engage with trading partners on climate and environmental action. Commitments to 
sustainability have been continuously strengthened in EU trade agreements, in particular 
with regard to enhancing climate change action. The Commission has also been stepping 
up effort s to implement and enforce the sustainable development commitments of EU 
trade agreements, and these efforts will be further enhanced with the appo intment of a 
Chief Trade Enforcement Officer. On climate change more specifically, the EU’s most 
recent agreements all include a binding commitment of the Parties to ratify and 
effectively implement the Paris Agreement. The Commission will propose to make the 
respect of the Paris agreement an essential element for all future comprehensive trade 
agreements. The EU’s trade policy facilitates trade and investment in green goods and 
services and promotes climate -friendly public procurement. Trade policy also ne eds to 
ensure undistorted, fair trade and investment in raw materials that the EU economy needs 
for the green transition. It can help address harmful practices such as illegal logging, 
enhance regulatory cooperation promote EU standards and remove non -tariff barriers in 
the renewable energy sector. All chemicals, materials, food and other products that are 
placed on the European market must fully comply with relevant EU regulations and 
standards. The EU should use its expertise in “green” regulation to enc ourage partners to 
design similar rules that are as ambitious as the EU’s rules, thus facilitating trade and 
enhancing environment protection and climate mitigation in these countries. 
 
22 As the world’s largest single market, the EU can set standards that ap ply across 
global value chains. The Commission will continue to work on new standards for 
sustainable growth and use its economic weight to shape international standards that are 
in line with EU environmental and climate ambitions. It will work to facilita te trade in 
environmental goods and services, in bilateral and multilateral forums, and in supporting 
open and attractive EU and global markets for sustainable products. It will work with 
global partners to ensure the EU’s resource security and reliable ac cess to strategic raw 
materials. 
The EU’s international cooperation and partnership policy should continue to help 
channel both public and private funds to achieve the transition. While the EU and its 
Member States remain the world's leading donors of dev elopment assistance and provide 
over 40% of the world's public climate finance. As public funds will not suffice, the EU 
and its Member States will coordinate their support to engage with partners to bridge the 
funding gap by mobilising private finance. The Commission proposal for a 
Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation Instrument proposes to 
allocate a target of 25% of its budget to climate -related objectives. The Commission will 
also support the commitment made by national public financ ial resources to improve the 
investment climate and achieve contributions from the private sector. This work will 
need to be accompanied by opportunities to de -risk investments in sustainable 
development through tools such as funding guarantees and blended financing. 
To mobilise international investors, the EU will also remain at the forefront of 
efforts to set up a financial system that supports global sustainable growth . The EU 
will build on the International Platform on Sustainable Finance that was rec ently 
established to coordinate efforts on environmentally sustainable finance initiatives such 
as taxonomies, disclosures, standards and labels. The Commission will also encourage 
discussions at other international fora, in particular the G7 and G20. 
4. TIME TO ACT - TOGETHER : A EUROPEAN CLIMATE PACT 
The involvement and commitment of the public and of all stakeholders is crucial to 
the success of the European Green Deal. Recent political events show that game -
changing policies only work if citizens are fully involved in designing them. People are 
concerned about jobs, heating their homes and making ends meet, and EU institutions 
should engage with them if the Green Deal is to succeed and deliver lasting change. 
Citizens are and should remain a driving force o f the transition. 
The Commission will launch a European Climate Pact by March 2020 to focus on 
three ways to engage with the public on climate action . First, it will encourage 
information sharing, inspiration, and foster public understanding of the threat and the 
challenge of climate change and environmental degradation and on how to counter it. It 
will use multiple channels and tools to do so, including events in Member States, on the 
model of the Commission’s on -going citizens’ dialogues. Second, there s hould be both 
real and virtual spaces for people to express their ideas and creativity and work together 
on ambitious action, both at individual and collective level. Participants would be 
encouraged to commit to specific climate action goals. Third, the C ommission will work 
on building capacity to facilitate grassroots initiatives on climate change and 
environmental protection. Information, guidance and educational modules could help 
exchange good practice. The Commission will ensure that the green transit ion features 
prominently in the debate on the future of Europe. 
 
23 The Climate Pact will build on the Commission’s on -going series of citizens’ 
dialogues and citizens’ assemblies across the EU, and the role of social dialogue 
committees . It will continue to w ork to empower regional and local communities, 
including energy communities. The urban dimension of cohesion policy will be 
strengthened, and the proposed European Urban Initiative will provide assistance to cities 
to help them make best use of opportuniti es to develop sustainable urban development 
strategies. The EU Covenant of Mayors will continue to be a central force. The 
Commission will work with i t to continue to provide assistance to cities and regions that 
want to commit to ambitious pledges on climate and energy policies. It will remain an 
essential platform to share good practices on how to implement change locally. 
The Commission is also keen to reduce its environmental impact as an institution 
and as an employer. It will present a comprehensive action plan in 2020 to implement 
itself the objectives of the Green Deal and to become climate neutral by 2030. It calls on 
all the other institutions , bodies and agencies of the EU to work with it and come forward 
with similar ambitious measures. 
In addition to the Climate Pact, the Commission and Member States should work to 
ensure that all available planning tools for the European Green Deal are used 
coherently. The most important of these are the national energy and climate plans and 
the proposed strategic national plans to implement the common agricultural policy. The 
Commission will ensure that they are fit for purpose and that Member States are 
implementing them effectively, and will use tools such as the European Semester as 
appropriate. 
European funds, including for rural development, will help rural areas to harness 
opportunities in the circular and bio -economy. The Commission will reflect this in its 
long-term vision for rural areas. It will pay particular attention to the role of outermost 
regions in the European Green Deal, taking into account their vulnerability to climate 
change and natural disasters and their unique assets: biodiversity an d renewable energy 
sources. The Commission will take forward the work on the Clean Energy for EU Islands 
Initiative to develop a long -term framework to accelerate the clean energy transition on 
all EU islands. 
The Commission and the Member States must also ensure that policies and 
legislation are enforced and deliver effectively. The environmental implementation 
review will play a critical role in mapping the situation in each Member State. The 
Commission will also present a new environmental action program me to complement the 
European Green Deal that will include a new monitoring mechanism to ensure that 
Europe remains on track to meet its environmental objectives. The Commission will also 
launch a dashboard to monitor progress against all of the European G reen Deal 
objectives. 
The Commission will consider revising the Aarhus Regulation to improve access to 
administrative and judicial review at EU level for citizens and NGOs who have 
concerns about the legality of decisions with effects on the environment . The 
Commission will also take action to improve their access to justice before national courts 
in all Member States. The Commission will also promote action by the EU, its Member 
States and the international community to step up efforts against environment al crime. 
 
The European Green Deal launches a new growth strategy for the EU. It supports the 
transition of the EU to a fair and prosperous society that responds to the challenges posed 
by climate change and environmental degradation, improving the quality of life of 
 
24 current and future generations. The Commission invites the European Parliament and the 
European Council to endorse the European Green Deal and to give their full weight to the 
measures it contains.