1 ISCC EU 202 -6 RENEWABLE FUELS OF NON -BIOLOGICAL ORIGIN (RFNBOS) 
AND RECYCLED CARBON FUELS (RCFS) 
ISCC EU 20 2-6 
Renewable Fuels of Non -Biological 
Origin (RFNBO s) and Recycled Carbon 
Fuels (RCFs) 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Document Title: ISCC EU 202 -6 RENEWABLE FUELS OF NON -BIOLOGICAL ORIGIN 
(RFNBOs) AND RECYCLED CARBON FUELS (RCFs) 
Version 1.4 
Valid from: 02 January 2025 

 Copyright notice 
© 202 4 ISCC System GmbH 
This ISCC document is protected by copyright. It is freely available from the ISCC website 
or upon request . 
No part of this copyrighted document might be changed or amended. The document might 
not be duplicated or copied in any form or by any means for commercial purpose without 
permission of ISCC . 
 
© ISCC System GmbH Content 
1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 5 
2 Scope and Normative References ................................ ................................ ................... 5 
3 Basics for the certification of RFNBOs and RCFs ................................ ........................... 6 
4 Rules for Counting Electricity as (Fully) Renewable ................................ ........................ 9 
4.1 Electricity from directly connected installations ................................ .................... 12 
4.2 Electricity from the grid ................................ ................................ .......................... 13 
4.2.1 Electricity from a grid with renewable energy share exceeding 90% ......... 14 
4.2.2 Electricity via a grid with an emission intensity lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ 
with further requirements ................................ ................................ ...................... 16 
4.2.3 Electricity from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of downward 
redispatching of installations generating renewable electricity ............................ 17 
4.2.4 Electricity via the grid with further requirements ................................ ......... 17 
4.3 Criteria for counting electricity from grid with further requirements ...................... 18 
4.3.1 Additionality ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 18 
4.3.2 Temporal correlation ................................ ................................ .................... 19 
4.3.3 Geographical correlation ................................ ................................ .............. 21 
4.4 Documentation of renewable electricity and RFNBO production ......................... 22 
5 Rules for eligible inputs for RCFs ................................ ................................ ................... 23 
6 Traceability and Chain of Custody ................................ ................................ ................. 23 
Annex I: Definitions ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 27 
Annex II: Power Purchase Agreement and Guarantees of Origin (GoO) ............................... 28 
Annex III: Implementation of bidding zone concept and curtailment in non -EU countries ..... 30 
Annex IV: Requirements to verify eligible electricity sourcing ................................ ................. 32 

© ISCC System GmbH 
 
 1 Introduction 
E-fuels - energy carriers derived from renewable electricity - are expected to 
play an essential role in moving towards a fully renewable energ y system . E-
fuels will be particularly important for decarbonizing sectors that are exp ected 
to rely on liquid fuels in the long term , such as maritime and aviation, in that 
they complement direct electrification as drop -in alternatives to fossil fuels. 
The Renewable Energy Directive (EU) 2018/2001 ( recast) (hereafter RED II) 
establishes the overall framework for the production and promot ion of energy 
from renewable sources, including in the transport sector. The RED II 
specifies that so -called renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non -
biological origin (hereafter RFNBOs) can be used to contribute to the overall 
target of 14% for the share of renewable energy in the transport sector in EU 
Member States. The amendment of the RED II1 (additionally sets an industry 
sub-target for hydrogen meeting RFNBO criteria used for energy and non -
energy purposes . 
Further , the RED II defines the fuel category ‘ Recycled Carbon Fuels’ 
(hereafter RCFs) which in their nature are not made from renewable re sources 
and, thus, do not contribute to the main target of the renewable energy share 
of the gross final energy consumption in the Union. However, Member States 
may decide to allow the accounting of RCFs towards the quota of renewable 
energy in the transport sector . This reflects the benefit that RCF s, although 
not renewable , can contribute to reduce GHG emissions by add ing a nother 
lifecycle to the carbon that would otherwise end up in the atmosphere directly. 
To ensure that RFNBOs and RCFs contribute to a reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions, the RED II requires them to achieve at least a 70% GHG 
emissions saving threshold (via avoided emissions) in compari son to the RED 
II fossil reference . 
The RED II also specifies that the electricity used for RFNBO production must 
be from renewable sources , e.g. wind, solar or water but not from biomass . 
2 Scope and Normative References 
This document specifies the certification requirements to produce RFNBOs 
and RCFs under the ISCC EU system . It is valid in addition to the other ISCC 
EU system documents. 
In the Delegated Act based on Art. 27(3) RED II (Commission Delegated 
Regula tion EU 2023/ 1184 ) on the rules for the production of renewable liquid 
and gaseous transport fuels of non -biological origin (hereafter Delegated Act 
 
1 Directive (EU) 2023/2413 amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and Directive 
98/70/EC as regards to the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and repealing Council Directive 
(EU) 2015/652 (hereafter referred to as “revised RED II". The revised RED II is also known as RED III).) E-fuels as 
alternative to 
fossil fuels 
The RED II /RED 
III and RFNBOs 
The RED II and 
RCFs 
GHG emissions 
savings 
Renewable 
electricity 
Delegated Acts 

© ISCC System GmbH 

on RFNBOs)2, the EU Commission lays out rules and guidelines intend ing to 
ensure that the electricity used to produce the RFNBOs can be considered 
fully renewable. 
The Delegated Act based on Article 28 (5) RED II specifies a methodology for 
assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from renewable liquid and 
gaseous transport fuels of non -biological origin and from recycled carbon 
fuels .3 The specific GHG requirements determine the emissions for RFNBOs 
and RCFs are laid down in ISCC EU Document 205-1 “Renewable Fuels of 
Non-Biological Origin and Recycled Carbon Fuels - Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions”. Additionally , guidance published by the European Commission in 
the “Q&A for the certification of RFNBOs and RCF”4 was also considered for 
the development of this System Document. 
In the revised RED II, RFNBOs are defined as: “ renewable fuels of non -
biological origin” means liquid and gaseous fuels the energy content of which 
is derived from renewable sources other than biomass .5 
RCFs6 are defined as liquid and gaseous fuels that are produced from liquid 
or solid waste streams of non -renewable origin which are not suitable for 
material recovery in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2008/98/EC7, or 
from waste processing gas and exhaust gas of non -renewable origin which 
are produced as an unavoidable and unintentional consequence of the 
production process in industrial installations. 
The Annex in this document contains further particular relevant definitions of 
the RED II and the Delegated Act on RFNBOs. 
3 Basics for the certification of RFNBOs and RCFs 
The RED II defines RFNBOs as “liquid or gaseous fuels which are used in the 
transport sector other than biofuels or biogas , the energy content of which is 
derived from renewable sources other than biomass ”. 
 
2 Commission Delegated Regulation supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council by establishing a Union methodology setting out detailed rules for the production of 
renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non -biological origin . The delegated regulat ion was 
adopted on 10 February 2023. The document has been published on the Official Journal of the European 
Union on 20 June 2023 (Volume 66). 
3 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) supplementing Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council by establishing a minimum threshold for greenhouse gas emissions savings 
of recycled carbon fuels and by specifying a methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions 
savings from renewable liquid and gaseous transport fuels of non -biological origin and from recycled 
carbon fuels. The delegated regulation was adopted on 13 February 2023. The publicat ion in the Official 
Journal of the European Union was pending at the time the ISCC EU Document 202 -6 was created 
4 Q&A for the certification of RFNBOs and RCF, published on March 14th 2024, in the Voluntary Schemes 
webpage:  -energy/bioenergy/voluntary -schemes_en , In the 
following referred to as Q&A RFNBOs 
5 Art. 1(1g) revised RED II 
6 Art. 2(35) RED II 
7 Directive 2008/98/EC on waste and repealing certain directives Definitions of 
RFNBOs and 
RCFs 
RFNBOs 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Following the definition of renewable energy in the RED II, t his means that a 
RFNBO is produced using primarily electricity from wind, solar (solar thermal 
and solar photovoltaic) and geothermal energy, ambient energy, tide, wave 
and other ocean energy , and hydropower . By contrast, according to the 
definition of ‘installation generating renewable electricity’ (see Annex I ) given 
in the DA on RFNBOs, RFNBOs fully renewable electricity cannot be sourced 
from installations using energy derived from biogenic sources suc h as 
biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas or biogas. 
As the production of RFNBOs is not associated with the cultivation of biomass , 
it does not generally compete with food or feed production. 
A prominent example for a RFNBO is renewable hydrogen, derived from 
renewable electricity using electrolysis . The Delegated Act on RFNBOs 
explicitly states that, in practice, the energy content of nearly all RFNBOs is 
based on renewable hydrogen produced via electrolysis. 
Figure 1 provides an overview over an exemplary supply chain for RFNBO 
production and their potential markets and end -uses. 
 
Figure 1: An exemplary supply chain for RFNBO production . Hydrogen may be used 
directly as fuel or serve as an intermediate for other RFNBOs . 
Renewable 
energy sources 
No competition 
with food or feed 
Renewable 
hydrogen 
Exemplary 
supply chain 

© ISCC System GmbH 

The first element is generally an installation generating renewable electricity, 
followed by an electrolyser producing renewable hydrogen from that 
electricity. The renewable hydrogen can then either be used directly (e.g. the 
mobility, industrial or building sectors ) or used as an intermediate, by reacting 
it with other raw materials such as carbon dioxide (CO 2) (e.g. renewable 
hydrogen and CO 2 reacting to methane), other carbon sources like carbon 
monoxide (CO), or nitrogen ( N2) (e.g. renewable hydrogen and N 2 reacting to 
ammonia) into hydrogen derivat ives. 
RCFs are defined in the RED II as liquid and gaseous fuels that are produced 
from liquid or solid waste streams of non -renewable origin which are not 
suitable for material recovery in accordance with Article 4 of 
Directive 2008/98/EC, or from waste processing gas and exhaust gas of non -
renewable origin which are produced as an unavoidable and unintentional 
consequence of the production process in industrial installations . As described 
in the Annex of the Delegated Act on the GHG calculation methodology for 
RFNBOs and RCFs, the amount of RCFs that is created in a process is 
determined by the energy input s that comply with the definition above. 
Equal to RFNBOs, t he production of RCFs does not involve cultivation of 
biomass and, therefore, it does not generally compete with food or feed 
production. 
If CO 2 is used as a carbon source for ei ther RFNBO s or RCF s (e.g. to react 
with renewable hydrogen to a hydrocarbon RFNBO ), three different CO 2 types 
of origin can be distinguished . The CO 2 can come from waste fossil sources 
(for instance waste flue gases from industrial production and combustion 
processes), from biological sources (for instance alcohol fermentation or 
anaerobic digestion) or from atmospheric or naturally - occurring/geothermal 
sources. 
In any case, t he CO 2 must not be deliberately produced for the purpose of 
introducing it into an RFNBO or RCF production process . A fuel would be 
considered as a fossil fuel if the CO 2 was generated from fossil energy sources 
exclusively for the purpose of using it as input to produce a transport fuel. 
Similarly, the fuel would be considered as a biofuel, and not an RFNBO or 
RCF, if the CO 2 was generated from biomass specifically for the purpose of 
using it as input to produce a transport fuel . 
The ISCC EU system document s lay down the general rules regarding the 
basic audit and certification processes, risk management procedures as well 
as requirements for traceability and chain of custody and greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions calculation and verification under the ISCC EU system . The 
specific GHG calculation requirements for RFNBOs and RCFs are laid down 
in ISCC EU Document 20 5-1 “Renewable Fuels of Non -Biological Origin and 
Recycled Carbon Fuels - Greenhouse Gas Emissions ”. 
 RFNBO 
production steps 
RCFs 
No competition 
with food or feed 
CO 2 sources 
No deliberate 
production of 
CO 2 
Fundamentals of 
the ISCC system 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Under ISCC, as a basic principle, all economic operators that handle 
sustainable material8 (e.g. produce or generate, collect, process, store or 
trade) must be covered by an ISCC certification. The electrolyser and all 
subsequent elements in the downstream supply chain therefore must be 
certified individually. 
While the installation generating the renewable electricity does not have to be 
certified individually, the RFNBO producer needs to demonstrate to the auditor 
that the renewable electricity sourced from that installation fulfils the 
requirements for counting sourced electricity as fully renewable as laid out in 
chapter 4. 
Figure 2 describes how different elements in a simplified RFNBO supply chain 
are cover ed by ISCC certification . Requirements regarding traceability and 
chain of custody are covered in detail in chapter 5. 

Figure 2: Simplified example of how a RFNBO supply chain would be covered by 
ISCC certification. 
4 Rules for Counting Electricity as (Fully ) 
Renewable 
The RED II requires that t o ensure that RFNBOs contribute to a reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions, the electricity used for RFNBO s production has to 
be of renewable origin. In line with the methodology laid out in the RED II and 
the Delegated Act on RFNBOs , this chapter provides the rules for counting 
the electricity used for the production of RFNBOs as renewable. 
As a general rule, electricity sourced from installations generating renewable 
electricity for the production of RFNBOs may be counted as renewable only if 
it is generated from wind, solar (solar thermal and solar photovoltaic) and 
geothermal energy, ambient energy, tide, wave and other ocean energy, and 
hydropower . This is in line with the RED II definition of renewable energy, 
excluding energy from biogenic sources . According to the Delegated Act on 
 
8 In the RFNBOs context, sustainable material may also refer to (fully) renewable electricity. 
Obligati on for 
certification 
Coverage of RE 
installations 
Supply chain 
certification 
coverage 
Renewable 
electricity 
Eligible 
renewable 
energy sources 

© ISCC System GmbH 

RFNBOs, storage units cannot be considered as installations generating 
renewable electricity . Electricity is sourced from installation generating 
renewable electricity when the approaches described in chapter 4.1, 4.2.2, 
4.2.3 and 4.2.4 are used. In contrast , if the grid mix determines the share of 
renewable electricity, as described below9 and in chapter 4.2.1, biogenic 
energy is included following the definition in the D elegated Act on RFNBOs 
Article 4(1) subparagraph 2. 
In this chapter, following the terminology employed in the RED II and the 
Delegated Act on RFNBOs , terms such as ‘bidding zone’, ‘imbalance 
settlement period’ or ‘downward redispatching’ are used. Definitions of these 
terms can be found in the Annex of this document. As a basic principle, in 
scenarios where these exact terms do not exist or do not apply (e.g. 
production in non -EU countries) , equivalent concepts should be used. These 
equivalent terms should reflect the nature of the electricity system in th e given 
scenario or country (e.g. an equivalent term for ‘bidding zone’ should take into 
account the respective electricity market design , such as a nodal instead of a 
zonal design). Wherever guarantees of origin ( hereafter GoO s) are mentioned 
in the following also equivalent documents (such as renewable energy 
guarantees of origin in the UK or renewable energy certificates in the US, 
Canada, Australia, and other countries) can be used . For further guidance on 
Power Purchase Agreements and guarantees of origin please see Annex II 
and for further guidance on bidding zone equivalents and implementation of 
rules on curtailment please see Annex III. 
Electricity u sed to produce RFNBO can be considered fully renewable if the 
respective require ments set by the RED II and the Delegated Acts on 
RFNBOs are met. These requirements are subject of t his chapter. If these 
requirements are not met the renewable share of electricity in the grid can still 
be used for RFNBO production . Provided sourcing of renewable electricity 
according to each option (see chapter 4.4) is duly documented , RFNBOs 
producers may combine those options. While fully renewable electricity can 
be accounted with zero emissions , electricity sourced from the grid without 
meeting the r equirements for fully renewable electricity will not be accounted 
with zero emissions . This is further described in the ISCC EU System 
Document 205 -1. 
If electricity is sourced from the grid and the RFNBO producer wants to claim 
a share of this electricity as renewable based on the share of renewable 
electricity in the grid , they shall demonstrate to the auditor the average share 
of electricity from renewable sources in the country where the installation 
producing RFNBOs is located , as measured two years before the year in 
question (the year in which the production of RFNBOs takes place) . This shall 
be done using data from official sources (e.g. via statistics provided by 
Eurostat SHARES, or by the respective country’s energy office ) which are 
calculated by dividing the gross final consumption of electricity from renewable 
 
9 See paragraph “Average share of renewable electricity” . Use of 
equivalent 
concepts 
Average share of 
renewable 
electricity 
Proof of average 
RE share 

© ISCC System GmbH 

sources in the country , calculated by analogy to the rules set out in Article 7(2) 
of the RED II , by the gross electricity production from all energy sources as 
defined in Annex B to Regulation (EC) 1099/2008, except from water 
previously pumped uphill (excluded from both the numerator and the 
denominator), plus imports minus exports of electricity t o the count ry. 
In countries where GoOs are available the RFNBO producer shall 
demonstrate to the auditor that GoOs equivalent to the amount of electricity 
sourced as renewable according to this option are cancelled. This GoOs can 
either be purchased and cancelled by the RFNBO producer or the RFNBO 
producer can demonstrate to the auditor that the cancellation is taken care of 
by a competent body designated by the Member State . 
Electricity is considered as being fully renewable if the renewable properties 
can be demonstrated according to the rules set out in the RED II and the 
Delegated Act on RFNBOs. 
The rules under which electricity can be considered fully renewable differ for 
different electricity sourcing scenarios. A basic distinction is made as to 
whether the electricity is obtained via a direct connection to an installation 
generating renewable electricity or whether the electricity is obtained via the 
grid. The following five scenarios for sourcing renewable electricity for the 
production of RFNBOs are distinguished: 
a) Electricity from directly connected installations 
b) Electricity from a grid with a renewable energy share exceeding 90% 
c) Electricity via a grid with a n emission intensity lower than 18 
gCO 2eq/MJ with further requirements 
d) Electricit y from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of downward 
redispatching of installations generating renewable electricity 
e) Electricity via the grid with further requirements 
Figure 3 depicts the different scenarios covered by the RED II and the 
Delegated Act on RFNBOs. Cancellation of 
Guarantees of 
Origin 
Fully renewable 
electricity 
Different 
sourcing 
scenarios 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Figure 3 : Overview of the requirements depending on the type of electricity 
connection . 
Depending on the sourcing option, different requirements exist for counting 
the obtained electricity as fully renewable, as laid out in the following 
subchapters. RFNBO producers are allowed to source renewable (grid share 
option - see fourth paragraph of this chapter ) and fully renewable electricity 
at the same time. Also sourcing of fully renewable electricity via different 
options is possible . In all case s, the respective requirements apply, and the 
amounts of electricity sourced via each option need to be documented 
separately (see chapter 4.4). 
4.1 Electricity from directly connected installations 
To count electricity that is obtained via a direct connection to an installation 
generating renewable electricity as fully renewable , the RFNBO producer shall 
provide evidence on the following: 
a) The electricity is supplied 
> by an installation generating renewable electricity via a direct 
line, or 
> by an installation generating renewable electricity within the 
installation (site) that is producing RFNBO s; 
b) The installation generating renewable electricity 
> came into operation not earlier than 36 months before the 
installation producing RFNBO s, and 
> where additional production capacity is added to an existing 
installation producing RFNBO s, the added capacity shall be 
Different 
requirements 

© ISCC System GmbH 

considered to be part of the existing installation, provided that 
the capacity is added at the same site and the addition takes 
place no later than 36 months after the initial installation came 
into operation ; 
c) The installation generating renewable electricity 
> is not connected to the grid, or 
> is connected to the grid but a smart metering system that 
measures all electricity flows from the grid shows that no 
electricity has been taken from the grid to produce RFNBO s. 
During the audit, auditors must check the existence of a direct line between 
the installation generating renewable electricity and the installation producing 
the RFNBO. 
The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate through appropriate documentation 
(e.g. document indicating the date of commission ing) that the installation 
generating renewable electricity came into operation not earlier than 36 
months before the installation producing the RFNBO. Where additional 
production capacity is added to an existing installation producing RFNBOs, 
the RFNBO producer shall provide appropriate documentation that the added 
capacity came into operation no later than 36 months after the in itial operation. 
Where a smart metering system as described above is used, the audit or shall 
verify that the system is correctly calibrated, measures all electricity flows and 
that no electricity has been taken from the grid to produce the RFNBOs. 
Where available, the electricity supplied via a direct connection should come 
with GoO to reduce the risk that any given unit of renewable electricity is not 
counted more than once. 
If GoO are issued for electricity generated in the directly connected installation 
it must be ensured that all GoO connected to the amounts of electr icity 
consumed in the installation producing RFNBOs are cancel led. Appropriate 
documentation on the cancellation of GoO must be made available to the 
auditor. 
If no GoO were issued for the electricity in the directly connected installation, 
this has to be confirmed during the audit. 
More information on GoO and PPA can be found in Annex II of this document. 
 
4.2 Electricity from the grid 
In many cases, an installation producing RFNBO s will obtain the required 
electricity from or via the grid. Four different scenarios of receiving electricity 
from or via the grid that may qualify as fully renewable can be distinguished: Existence of 
direct line 
Proof of start of 
operation 
Check of smart 
metering system 
Guarantees of 
origin or 
equivalent 
Cancellation of 
guarantees of 
origin 
Electricity via 
grid 

© ISCC System GmbH 

1. Electricity from a grid with a renewable energy share exceeding 90% 
(chapter 4.2.1) 
2. Electricity from a grid with an emission intensity lower than 18 
gCO 2eq/MJ with further requirements (chapter 4.2.2) 
3. Electricity from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of downward 
redispatching of installations generating renewable electricit y 
(chapter 4.2.3) 
4. Electricity from the grid with further requirements (chapter 4.2.4) 
4.2.1 Electricity from a grid with renewable energy share exceeding 
90% 
The RFNBO producer may count electricity taken from the grid as fully 
renewable if 
a) the installation producing RFNBO s is located in a bidding zone where 
the average proportion of renewable electricity exceeded 90% in the 
previous calendar year , and 
b) the number of full load hours of RFNBOs production is limited to the 
share of renewable electricity in the bidding zone (i.e. the installation 
producing RFNBOs can be operated for as many hours per year as 
corresponds to the respective renewable energy share) . In this regard, 
RFNBOs produced outside of the maximum full load hours limit will be 
counted as non -renewable. 
The average share of renewable electricity shall be determined by dividing the 
gross final consumption of electricity from renewable sources in the bidding 
zone10 by the gross electricity production from all energy sources11, except 
from water previously pumped uphill (i.e. pumped storage) , plus imports minus 
exports of electricity to the bidding zone. To identify the bidding zone , 
information on the location of the RFNBO producing installation from official 
sources shall be used. Figure 4 may be considered approximate guidance . 
Once the average share of renewable electricity exceeds 90% in a calendar 
year, it shall be considered to be higher than 90% for the subsequent five 
calendar years. 
The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate to the auditor that the average 
proportion of renewable electricity in the bidding zone where the installation 
producing RFNBOs is located exceeded 90% in at least one year of the last 
six preceding calendar year s. In the case bidding zones are equivalent to the 
country, statistic data provided by Eurostat (Eurostat SHARES12) shall be 
used . Where bidding zones are not identical to countries, data from official 
 
10 Calculated by analogy to the rules set out in Article 7(2) of RED II 
11 Energy sources as defined in Annex B to Regulation (EC) 1099/2008 Regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2008 on energy statistics 
12  Grid with high 
RE share 
Calculation of 
average RE 
share 
Continuation of 
high RE share 
Proof of high RE 
share 

© ISCC System GmbH 

national statistics have to be used that have been derived in line with the 
methodology applied for determining the RES -E share in the SHARES tool. In 
the case of non -EU countries, data published by IEA (International Energy 
Agency) shall be used. In the case IEA data are not available, data from 
national statistical institutes may be used. Figure 4 shows a recent bidding 
zone configu ration in Europe . 
To demonstrate to the auditor that the permissible annual operating hours 
have not been exceeded , the mandatory documentation on the produced 
amounts of RFNBO (see 4. 4) can be used . If electricity is sourced from the 
grid during the remaining hours , without demonstrating that this electricity can 
count as fully renewable according to the options described in chapters 4.2.2, 
4.2.3 or 4.2.4, this electricity shall be considered non -renewable . 
In countries w here GoO s are available RFNBO producer shall demonstrate to 
the auditor that GoOs equivalent to the amount of electricity sourced as fully 
renewable according to this option are cancelled . For this GoOs can either be 
purchased and cancelled by the RFNBO producer or the RFNBO producer 
can demonstrate to the auditor that the cancellation is taken care of by a 
competent body designated by the Member State . 
 
Documentation 
of operating 
hours 
Cancellation of 
guarantees of 
origin 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Figure 1 Overview of the b idding zone configuration in Europe in 2022. A more 
detailed version can for example be found on the website of ENTSO -E.13 
4.2.2 Electricity via a grid with an emission intensity lower than 18 
gCO 2eq/MJ with further requirements 
Fuel producers may count electricity sourced via the grid as fully renewable if 
the installation producing RFNBO is located in a bidding zone where the 
emission intensity of electricity is lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ, provided that the 
following criteria are met: 
a) the fuel producers have concluded directly, or via intermediaries, one 
or more renewables power purchase agreements (PPA s) with 
economic operators producing renewable electricity in one or more 
installations generating renewable electricity for an amount that is at 
least equivalent to the amount of electricity that is claimed as fully 
renewable, and the electricity claimed is effectively produced in this or 
these installations; 
b) the conditions on temporal and geographical correlation in accordance 
with chapters 4.3.3 and 4. 3.4 are met . 
The emission intensity of electricity shall be determined following the 
approach for calculating the average carbon intensity of grid electricity in the 
methodology for determining GHG savings based on latest available data (as 
laid down in Annex II of ISCC EU System Document 205-1). 
Once the emission intensity of electricity is lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ in a 
calendar year, the average emission intensity of electricity shall be continued 
to be considered lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ for the subsequent five calendar 
years. 
The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate to the auditor that the emission 
intensity of the electricity in the bidding zone where the installation producing 
RFNBOs is located has been lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ in at least one 
calendar year of the last six preceding calendar years. 
Where available, the electricity supplied under the PPA(s) should come with 
GoO to reduce the risk that any given unit of renewable electricity is counted 
more than once . 
If GoO s are issued for electricity generated in the installation (s) covered by 
the PPA(s) it must be ensured that all GoO s connected to the amounts of 
electricity consumed in the installation producing RFNBOs are cancelled. 
Appropriate documentation on the cancellation of GoO must be made 
available to the auditor. 
If no GoO s were issued for the electricity in the installation (s) covered by PPA , 
this has to be confirmed during the audit . 
 
13 Source: entsoe.eu/data/energy -identification -codes -eic/eic -area-codes -map/ Emission 
intensity of 
electricity 
Continued low 
emission 
intensity 
Guarantees of 
origin or 
equivalent 
Cancellation of 
guarantees of 
origin 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Intermediaries between the RFNBOs producer and the renewable electricity 
producer may be contracting parties (e.g. intermediaries can represent the 
renewable electricity producer). However, a direct relation between the 
renewable electricity producer and t he RFNBOs producer shall be maintained 
and demonstrated, e.g. the contract between the RFNBOs and the 
intermediary shall mention the same installation(s) producing renewable 
electricity reported in the contract(s) between the intermediary and the 
renewable electricity producer. 
More information on GoO and PPA can be found in Annex II of this document. 
4.2.3 Electricity from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of 
downward redispatching of installations generating renewable 
electricity 
Electricity taken from the grid that is used to produce RFNBOs may also be 
counted as fully renewable if the electricity is consumed during an imbalance 
settlement period during which the fuel producer can demonstrate, based on 
evidence from the national transmission system operator, that: 
a) power -generating installations using renewable energy sources were 
redispatched downwards in accordance with Article 13 of Regulation 
(EU) 2019/943 (Internal market for electricity ), and 
b) the electricity consumed for the production of RFNBOs reduced the 
need for redispatching by a corresponding amount. 
The evidence from the national transmission system operator , demonstrating 
the compliance with the two crit eria above must be made available to the 
auditor for all amounts of electricity claimed as fully renewable in accordance 
with this chapter . This evid ence must include a confirmation from the national 
transmission system operator that the amount of electricity is not claimed by 
any other party . 
Where GoOs are available RFNBO producer shall demonstrate to the auditor 
that GoOs equivalent to the amount of electricity sourced as fully renewable 
according to this option are cancelled. For this GoOs can either be purchased 
and cancelled by the RFNBO producer or the RFNBO producer can 
demonstrated to the auditor that the cancellation is taken care of by a 
competent body designated by the Member State . 
4.2.4 Electricity via the grid with further requirements 
Where the conditions in chapters 4.2.1 , 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 are not met, RFNBOs 
producers may count electricity taken from the grid as fully renewable if it 
complies with the conditions on additionalit y (4.3.1), geographical correlation 
(4.3.2) and temporal correlation (4.3.3). 
 
Electricity via PPA can be directly sourced from the RES producer or via 
intermediaries. In the latter case, a direct relation between the renewable Evidence 
Cancellation of 
guarantees of 
origin 

© ISCC System GmbH 

electricity producer and the RFNBOs producer shall be maintained and 
demonstrated. 
More information on GoO and PPA can be found in Annex II of this document. 
 
4.3 Criteria for counting electricity from grid with further 
requirements 
When the conditions laid down in chapters 4.2.1, 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 are not met, 
RFNBOs producers may count electricity as fully renewable if it complies with 
the conditions on additionality, geographical correlation and temporal 
correlation. 
4.3.1 Additionality 
The RED II requires an element of additionality, i.e. that the RFNBO producer 
is adding to the renewable deployment or to the financing of renewable 
energy. 
The additionality condition shall be considered complied if the fuel producers 
produce an amount of renewable electricity in their own installation that is at 
least equivalent to the amount of electricity claimed as fully renewable, or have 
concluded (directly or via intermediaries) one or more power purchase 
agreements (PPAs) with one or more installations for an amount or renewable 
electricity that is at least equivalent to the amount of electricity that is claimed 
as fully renewable and the electricity claim ed is effectively produced in the 
installation (s). 
Furthermore, the following criteria must be met: 
a) the installation generating renewable electricity came into operation 
not earlier than 36 months before the installation producing RFNBO . 
b) The installation generating renewable electricity has not received 
support in the form of operating aid or investment aid, excluding 
support received by installations before their repowering, financial 
support for land or for grid connections, support that does not 
constitute net support, such as support that is fully repaid and support 
for installations generating renewable electricity that are supplying 
installations producing RFNBOs used for research, testing and 
demonstration. 
The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate through appropriate documentation 
(e.g. document s indicating the date s of commissioning , GoO issued for 
electricity generated in the installation in question ) that the installation 
generating renewable electricity came into operation not earlier than 36 
months before the installation producing the RFNBO. 
Where an installation generating renewable electricity complied with the 
requirements set out in (a) of this paragraph under a renewables PPA with a 
fuel producer that has ended, it shall be considered to have come into RED II requires 
additionality 
Proof of recent 
start of operation 
Ending of PPA 

© ISCC System GmbH 

operation at the same time as the installation producing the RFNBO under a 
new renewables PPA. In this case, the RFNBO producer shall provide 
evidence to the auditor that the respective PPA has ended and has complied 
with the requirements set out in (a) before it ended . 
In case additional production capacity is added to an existing installation 
producing RFNBOs at the same site and the a dded capacity starts operating 
not later than 36 months after the initial installation came into operation, the 
added capacity is considered to have come into operation at the same time 
as the initial installation. The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate to the 
auditor the date on which the additional production capacity at the site came 
into operation. 
For installations producing RFNBOs that are not used for research, testing 
and demonstration purposes compliance with the requirement under (b) of this 
paragraph shall be demonstrated to the auditor via appropriate 
documentation , e.g. via a statement included in GoO . 
However, if the installation producing RFNBOs is used for research, testing 
and demonstration , the PPA(s) may also cover installations producing 
renewable electricity that have received support in the form of operating aid 
or investment aid . Evidence that the installa tion producing RFNBO s is used 
for research, testing , and demonstration purpose s has to be provided to the 
auditor . 
Where available, the electricity supplied from own installations or installations 
under PPA (s) should come with GoO to reduce the risk that any given unit of 
renewable electricity is counted more than once . 
If GoO is issued for electricity generated in own installation or in installations 
under PPA(s) it must be ensured that all GoO connected to the amounts of 
electricity consumed in the installation producing RFNBOs are cancelled. 
Appropriate documentation on the cancellation of GoO must be made 
available to the auditor. 
If no GoO was issued for the electricity sourced from the grid with further 
requirements, this has to be confirmed during the audit. 
The criteria on additionality under (a) and (b) do not apply until 01 January 
2038 to installations producing RFNBOs that come into operation before 01 
January 2028. This exemption does not apply to capacity added to existing 
RFNBO production installations after 01 January 2028 . 
More information on GoO and PPA can be found in Annex II of this document. 
 
4.3.2 Temporal correlation 
The RED II requires a temporal correlation between the generation of 
electricity that is claimed as fully renewable and the use of it for RFNBO Additional 
production 
capacity 
Support for RE 
installations 
Research, 
testing and 
demonstration 
Guarantees of 
origin or 
equivalent 
Cancellation of 
guarantees of 
origin 
Transition phase 
RED II requires 
temporal 
correlation 

© ISCC System GmbH 

produc tion. For electricity supplied with a direct connection , for electricity 
taken from a grid with a share of renewable electricity exceeding 90% (see 
4.2.1), and for electricity taken from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of 
downward redispatching of installations generating renewable electricity (see 
4.2.3) temporal correlation is considered to be met . For electricity sourced 
from indirectly connected installation s (see 4.2.2 and 4.2.4) the requirement 
for temporal correlation is considered to be met if one of the following cases 
applies : 
a) Until 31 December 2029 the temporal correlation condition shall be 
considered complied with if the RFNBO is produced during the same 
calendar month as the renewable electricity produced in own 
installations or in installations under renewable PPA(s) or from 
renewable electricity from a new storage14 asset that is located behind 
the same network connection point as the electrolyser or the 
installation generating renewable electricity, that has been charged 
during the same calendar month in which the electricity has been 
produced in own installations or in installations under renewable s 
PPA(s). 
b) From 1 January 203015, the temporal correlation condition shall be 
considered complied with if the RFNBO is produced during the same 
one-hour period as the renewable electricity produced in own 
installations or in installations under renewable PPA(s) or from 
renewable electricity from a new storage asset13 that is located behind 
the same network connection point as the electrolyser or the 
installation generating renewable electricity, that has been charged 
during the same one -hour period in which the electricity has been 
produced in own installations or in installations under renewables 
PPA(s) . 
c) The temporal correlation condition shall always be considered 
complied with if the RFNBO is produced during a one -hour period 
where the clearing price of electricity resulting from single day -ahead 
market coupling in the bidding zone, as referred to in Article 39 (2), 
point (a) of Regulation (EU) 2015/122216, is lower or equal to EUR 20 
per MWh or lower than 0 ,36 times the price of an allowance to emit 
one tonne of CO 2 equivalent during the relevant period for the purpose 
of meeting the requirements for an emission trading scheme of 
Directive 2003/87/EC17. This rule concerning the clearing price can be 
 
14 Storage assets are storage assets that came into operation not earlier than 36 months before the 
installation producing RFNBOs . 
15 According to Art. 6, 2nd paragraph of DA on RFNBOs , Member States may apply the rules set out in this 
paragraph from 1 July 2027 for RFNBO produced in their territory . In this case, compliance with the 
national law will be verified during the audit . 
16 Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015 establishing a guideline on capacity allocation 
and congestion management 
17 Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a 
scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council 
Directive 96/61/EC Before 31 
December 

From 01 
January 

© ISCC System GmbH 

applied only if the price for electricity is established in a functioning 
market and if the price of an allowance to emit one tonne of CO 2 
equivalent is established in a functioning market. The closing price of 
the previous trading day for December for the ongoing year (Source: 
ICE Index or EEX) should be applied for the implementation of this 
provision. 
Thus, t he documentation of generated and consumed electricity for the 
production of RFNBOs needs to be available on an hourly basis where 
relevant - even before 01 January 2030 . Chapter 4.4 goes into further detail 
on the data that will need to be documented . 
4.3.3 Geographical correlation 
The RED II also requires a geographical correlation between generation of 
electricity that is claimed as fully renewable and the use of it for RFNBO 
production. For electricity supplied with a direct connection (see 4.1), for 
electricity taken from a grid with a share of renewable electricity exceeding 
90% (see 4.2 .1), and for electricity taken from the grid avoiding or reducing 
the need of downward redispatching of installations generating renewable 
electricity (see 4.2.3) geographical correlation is consi dered to be met. For 
electricity sourced from indirectly connected installations (see 4.2.2 and 4.2.4) 
the geographical correlation condition is considered compiled with if at least 
one of the following criteria related to the location of the RFNBO installation is 
met: 
a) the own installation generating renewable electricity or the installation 
generating renewable electricity under a renewables PPA is located, 
or was located at the time when it came into operation, in the same 
bidding zone as the electrolyser; 
b) the own installation generating renewable electricity or the installation 
generating renewable electricity under a renewables PPA is located in 
an interconnected bidding zone, including in another Member State, 
and electricity prices in the relevant time period on the day -ahead 
market referred to in chapter 4.3.2 in the interconnected bidding zone 
is equal or higher than in the bidding zone where the RFNBO is 
produced; 
c) the own installation generating renewable electricity or the installation 
generating renewable electricity under the r enewable PPA is located 
in an offshore bidding zone that is interconnected with the bidding zone 
where the electrolyser is located. 
The RFNBO producer shall demonstrate the compliance with the geographical 
correlation condition to the auditor through appropriate documentation of the 
location (s) of the renewable electricity generating installation(s) and t he 
location of the installation producing RFNBOs. Where geographical 
correlation is claimed to be complied with by means of subparagraph (b) the Documentation 
of electricity 
RED II requires 
geographical 
correlation 

© ISCC System GmbH 

day-ahead prices at the relevant times of the involved bidding zones must be 
demonstr ated to the auditor through appropriate documentation. 
Member States may introduce additional criteria on geographical correlation 
to ensure compatibility of capacity additions with the national planning of the 
hydrogen and electricity grid. In this case, compliance with the national law 
will be verified during the audit . 
More information on GoO and PPA can be found in Annex II of this document. 
 
4.4 Documentation of renewable electricity and RFNBO production 
The RFNBO producer must document the following information for each hour , 
where relevant : 
a) The amount of electricity used to produce RFNBOs. This information 
must be further detailed as follows: 
i. the amount of electricity sourced from the grid that does not 
count as fully renewable as well as the proportion of renewable 
electricity ; 
ii. the amount of electricity that counts as fully renewable because 
it has been obtained from a direct connection to an installation 
generating renewable electricity as set out in chapter 4.1; 
iii. the amount of electricity sourced from the grid that counts as 
fully renewable as the renewable energy share is exceeding 
90% (see chapter 4.2.1 ); 
iv. the amount of electricity that counts as fully renewable in 
accordance with the criteria for a grid with an emission intensity 
lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ (see chapter 4.2.2); 
v. the amount of electricity that counts as fully renewable in 
accordance with the criteria set out in chapter 4.2.3 for 
electricity from the grid avoiding or reducing the need of 
downward redispatching of installations generating renewable 
electricity ; 
vi. the amount of electricity that counts as fully renewable in 
accordance with the criteria set out in chapter 4.2.4 (further 
requirements for electricity taken from the grid) . 
b) The amount of renewable electricity generated by all directly or 
indirectly connected installations (including on -site) regardless of 
whether the renewable electricity is used to produce RFNBOs or for 
other purposes . 
c) The amounts of produced RFNBOs and the amounts of any other 
products produced that do not qualify as RFNBOs . Hourly 
documentation 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Annex IV provides an overview on the requirements to source eligible 
electricity for RFNBOs production. 
5 Rules for eligible inputs for RCFs 
Inputs to a fuel production process that would qua lify a share or all of the 
output as RCFs need to comply with criteria that can be derived from the 
definition of RCFs. Two distinct input categories are named in the RED II: 
a) liquid or solid waste streams of non -renewable origin which are not 
suitable for material recovery in accordance with Article 4 of 
Directive 2008/98/EC , or 
b) waste processing gas and exhaust gas of non -renewable origin which 
are produced as an unavoidable and unintentional consequence of the 
production process in industrial installations . 
To qualify an input as liquid or solid waste that is eligible as input for RCF 
production according to (a) the RCF producer must demonstrate to the auditor 
that the material is a waste and not suitable for material recovery. To verify 
that the material can be considered a waste the requirements laid down in 
ISCC EU System Document 202-5 “Waste and Residues” shall be applied . In 
particular, Chapter 3 reports the definition of waste and waste hierarchy and 
according to Directive 2008/98/EC (Article 3(1) and Article 4, respectively ). 
The document additionally provides information about the verification process 
(Chapter 5) . The RCF producer must demonstrate, through appropriate 
documentation, that the waste cannot be used for material recovery (e.g. 
recent peer reviewed research showing that material recovery is not done on 
a commercial level for the input in question) . 
To qualify an input as waste processing gas and/or exhaust gas that is eligible 
as input for RCF production according to (b) the RCF producer must 
demonstrate to the auditor that the gas is either a waste (according to the 
ISCC EU System Document 202-5 “Waste and Residues” ) or would otherwise 
be exhausted into the atmosphere, is not produced intentionally, and cannot 
be avoided in the production process it stems from. 
6 Traceability and Chain of Custody 
The traceability of RFNBOs starts at the producer of the renewable electricity 
and covers the entire downstream supply chain. Traceability is achieved by 
applying an appropriate chain of custody method (e.g. mass balance or 
physical segregation) as well as relevant documentation. This includes Self -
declarations and Sustainability Declarations, assuring that all relevant 
information, such as the country of origin (i.e. the country where the renewable 
electricity was generated), the amount and the respective GHG emissions of 
a material can be clearly identified at each level of the supply chain. 
Specifically for self -declaration : In the case of electricity sourced via direct Two input 
categ ories 
Traceability in 
RFNBO s supply 
chains 

© ISCC System GmbH 

connection or via PPA, the auditor must verify that the information reported in 
the issued self -declaration(s) is correct and in line with the information 
reported in the PPA. Additionally, the auditor will verify that the issued GoOs 
are cancelled. In the case a self -declaration is issued by a point of origin for 
carbon sources that can be considered as waste or residues, requirements 
laid down in the ISCC EU System Document ISCC EU 20 3 “Traceability and 
Chain of Custody ” for self -declarations and points o f origin apply . 
The entire supply chain of RFNBOs must be covered by certification. The first 
element of the supply chain requiring individual certification is the economic 
operator producing hydrogen out of the renewable electricity (i.e. electrolyser 
certified under the scope processing unit). 
The traceability of RCFs starts at the economic operator at which the waste is 
generated and covers the entire downstream supply chain. This includes Self -
declarations and Sustainability Declarations, assuring that all relevant 
information, such as the amount and nature (liquid or solid waste streams , 
waste processing gas and exhaust gas ) and the respective GHG emissions 
of a material can be clearly identified at each level of the supply chain . In the 
case a self -declaration is issued from a point of origin for input(s) that can be 
considered waste or residues, requirements laid down in the ISCC EU System 
Document 203 “Traceability and Chain of Custody ” apply. 
The entire supply chain of RCFs must be covered by certification. The first 
element of the supply chain requiring individual certification is the economic 
operator collecting the RCFs feedstock from the point of origin and becoming 
the owner of the material. This economic operator is called “collecting point”. 
The general definitions of supply chain elements are specified in ISCC EU 
System Document 201 “System Basics” . The general requirements for 
traceability and chain of custody as well as general and specific audit 
requirements for the individual supply chain elements are specified in ISCC 
EU System Document 203 “Traceability and Chain of Custody”. 
The obligation for certification according to this standard starts with the 
economic operator producing hydrogen (processing unit) out of the renewable 
electricity or the collecting point of the RCFs feedstock . The producer of the 
renewable electricity shall provide a signed self -declaration to the certified 
hydrogen producer. The point of origin of the RCFs feedstock shall provide a 
signed self -declaration to the collecting point . All further certified elements of 
RFNBO s and RCFs supply chain issue sustainability declarations when they 
forward the sustainable material through the supply chain. Under ISCC, the 
identification and tracking of the origin, processing history distribution and 
location of materials can be done “step -by-step” through the entire supply 
chain. 
The following general and product related information must be available on 
Sustainability Declarations for all incoming sustainable material as well as on RFNBOs 
Certification 
covers entire 
supply chain 
Traceability in 
RCFs supply 
chains 
RCFs 
Certification 
covers entire 
supply chain 
General 
defin itions 
Forwarding of 
sustainability 
information 
Information on 
Sustainability 
Declarations 

© ISCC System GmbH 

the Sustainability Declarations issued by the certified party for all sustainable 
output material. 
General information 
> Name and address of the supplier 
> Name and address of the recipient 
> Related contract number 
> Date of dispatch of the sustainable material 
> Address of dispatch/shipping point of the sustainable material (e.g. 
processing unit, storage facility, hydrogen terminal, hydrogen entry 
point) (applicable if different from the address of the supplier) 
> Address of receipt/receiving point of the sustainable material ( e.g. 
processing unit, storage facility, hydrogen terminal , hydrogen exit point) 
(applicable if different from the address of the recipient) 
> Name of the certification system and certificate number of the supplier 
> Date of the issuance of the Sustainability Declaration 
> Unique number of the Sustainability D eclaration 
Product related information: 
> Type of product (e.g. hydrogen, methane, methanol, ammonia, etc); the 
product group has to be reflected 
> Raw material: Renewable electricity 
> Country of origin of the renewable electricity: Country where renewable 
electricity was produced 
> Scope of certification of the renewable electricity : 
o Statement: “The renewability of the electricity was verified 
according to Art. 3 and 4 of the Delegated Act on RFNBOs 
> Quantity of delivered sustainable product in MWh (based on LHV ), 
metric tons or m³ at 15°C 
> Statement(s) “ISCC Compliant” and/or “EU RED Compliant” (if 
applicable, please see ISCC Document 203 for further information) 
GHG emission information Please see ISCC EU System Document s 205 
“Greenhouse Gas Emissions ” and 205 -1 “Renewable Fuels of non -biological 
Origin (RFNBO) and Recycled Carbon Fuels: Greenhouse Gas Emissions” for 
further information.18 
 
18 In general, the application of default and disaggregated default values is possible under ISCC EU . Should 
such values become available for RFNBOs they could be applied under this standard 

© ISCC System GmbH 

> Statement of an actual value in kg CO 2eq per unit of product. For e td 
(transport and distribution) the means of transport and the 
transportation distance from the supplier to the recipient have to be 
included on the Sustainability Declaration 
The following calculation formula elements have to be reported separately: 
o ei: Emissions from the supply of inputs (i.e. production of 
renewable electricity) 
o ep: Emissions from processing 
o etd: Emissions from transport and distribution 
o eccs: Emission savings from carbon capture and geological 
storage 
If the processing unit produces final RFNBO the following information has to 
be added to the Sustainability D eclaration (i.e. Proof of Sustainability/PoS) : 
> GHG emissions of the RFNBO in g CO 2eq/MJ 
> The relevant fossil fuel comparator in g CO 2eq/MJ 
> GHG emission savings (in per cent) compared to the relevant fossil 
fuel 
> eu: Emissions from combusting the fuel in its end -use the fuel in use 
For RFNBOs the mass balance approach is applicable along the entire supply 
chain. Renewable hydrogen is produced through the electrolysis process by 
using renewable electricity. In the electrolysis process not only hydrogen but 
also other outputs are produ ced, depending on the type of electrolysis. One 
example for an additional output is oxygen (O 2). 
For processes in which electricity enables chemical reactions and is used to 
produce one or several products, the allocation of sustainability and GHG 
emission saving characteristics is limited to a “proportional approach” or 
“stoichiometric approach”. This means that the sustainable share must be 
attributed to all process products in the same ra tio in which these products are 
generated per unit of consumed electricity. A re -attribution or shift of the 
attributed sustainable share from one product of the process to another is not 
allowed. For example, in case of a water electrolysis processing uni t in which 
renewable electricity and water are used to produce hydrogen as the main 
product, the process yields equivalent amounts of hydrogen and oxygen (for 
every two moles of hydrogen produced, one mole of oxygen is also produced). 
In this case it is no t allowed to attribute or transfer sustainable characteristics 
from e.g. oxygen to hydrogen or vice versa. Please see ISCC EU System 
Document 203 “Traceability and Chain of Custody” for the general mass 
balance requirements. 
 Mass balance 
applicable 
Proportional 
allocation of 
sustainability 
characteristics 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Annex I: Definitions 
For the purposes of this document the definitions of the Delegated Act on 
RFNBOs and the RED II apply . This Annex contains a list of particularly 
relevant definitions. See the Delegated Act on RFNBOs and the RED II for a 
complete list of definitions. 
Relevant d efinitions of Art. 2 of the Delegated Act 
1) ‘bidding zone’ means bidding zone as defined in Article 2, point (65), 
of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council19 for Member States, or an equivalent concept for third 
countries ; 
2) ‘direct line’ means direct line as defined in Article 2, point (41), of 
Directive 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council20 
3) ‘installation generating renewable electricity’ means individual units, or 
groups of units, producing electricity in one or several locations from 
the same or from different renewable sources, as defined in Article 2 
(1) of RED II , excluding units producing electricity from biomass and 
storage units; 
4) ‘fuel producer’ means an economic operator that produces renewable 
liquid and gaseous transport fuel of non -biological origi n; 
5) ‘come into operation’ means starting production of renewable liquid 
and gaseous transport fuels of non -biological origin or renewable 
electricity for the first time or following a repowering as defined under 
Article 2, point (10) of RED II requiring investments exceeding 30% of 
the investment that would be needed to build a similar new installation; 
6) ‘smart metering system’ means smart metering system as defined in 
Article 2(23) of Directive 2019/94421; 
7) ‘imbalance settlement period’ means imbalance settlement period as 
defined in Article 2, point (15), of Regulation (EU) 2019/94322 within 
the Union, or an equivalent concept for third countries 

19 Art. 2(65) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the internal market for electricity : ‘bidding zone’ means the 
largest geographical area within which market participants are able to exchange energy without capacity 
allocation 
20 Art. 2(41) of Directive 2019/944 on common rules for the internal market for electricity and amending 
Directive 2012/27/EU : ‘direct line’ means either an electricity line linking an isolated generation site with 
an isolated customer or an electricity line linking a producer and an electricity supply undertaking to supply 
directly their own premises, subsidiaries and customers 
21 Art. 2(23) of Directive 2019/944: ‘smart metering system’ means an electronic system that is capable of 
measuring electricity fed into the grid or electricity consumed from the grid, providing more information 
than a conventional meter, and that is capable of transmitting and receiving data for information, 
monitoring and control purposes, using a form of electronic communication 
22 Art. 2(15) of Directive 2019/ 944: ‘imbalance settlement period’ means the time unit for which the 
imbalance of the balance responsible parties is calculated Relevant 
definitions 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Relevant d efinitions of Art. 2 of the RED II /RED III 
1) ‘energy from renewable sources’ or ‘renewable energy’ means energy 
from renewable non -fossil sources, namely wind, solar (solar thermal 
and solar photovoltaic) and geothermal energy, ambient energy, tide, 
wave and other ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, l andfill gas, 
sewage treatment plant gas, and biogas; 
10) ‘repowering’ means renewing power plants that produce renewable 
energy, including the full or partial replacement of installations or 
operation systems and equipment for the purposes of replacing 
capacity or increasing the efficiency or capacity of the ins tallation; 
12) ‘guarantee of origin’ means an electronic document which has the sole 
function of providing evidence to a final customer that a given share or 
quantity of energy was produced from renewable sources; 
17) ‘renewables power purchase agreement’ means a contract under 
which a natural or legal person agrees to purchase renewable 
electricity directly from an electricity producer; 
35) ‘recycled carbon fuels’ means liquid and gaseous fuels that are 
produced from liquid or solid waste streams of non -renewable origin 
which are not suitable for material recovery in accordance with Article 
4 of Directive 2008/98/EC, or from waste processing gas and exhaust 
gas of non -renewable origin which are produced as an unavoidable 
and unintentional consequence of the production process in industrial 
installations; 
36) ‘renewable fuels of non -biological origin ’ means liquid and gaseous 
fuels the energy content of which is derived from renewable sources 
other than biomass . 
 
Annex II: Power Purchase Agreement and 
Guarantee s of O rigin (GoO) 
In the context of RFNBOs a PPA provide s a clear link between a RFNBO 
producer and one or more installations generating renewable electricity if the 
link is not otherwise given ( e.g., direct connection ). The basis for the minimum 
requirements for a PPA derives from the PPA definition laid down in the RED 
II (Article 2(17), and Annex I this document). Intermediaries between the 
RFNBOs producer and the renewable electric ity producer may be contracting 
parties (e.g. intermediaries can represent the renewable electricity producer). 
However, a direct relation between the renewable electricity producer and the 
RFNBOs producer shall be maintained and demonstrated , e.g. the contract 
between the RFNBOs and the inter mediary shall mention the same 
installation (s) producing renewable electricity reported in the contract(s) 
between the intermediary and the renewable electricity producer . 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Guarantee of Origin (GoO) is defined as in Article 2(12) of the RED II and 
represent a tool that is applied within the territories of the European Union . 
Issued GoO must meet the requirements laid down in Article 19 RED II (this 
Article applies only in the EU territories) and furthermore carry the same 
attributes as the physical installation producing the electricity , including, inter 
alia, the location of the installation, the age of the installation, and the time of 
the production. GoOs must have issued f or the installations covered by PPAs . 
The renewable electricity producers not allowed to sell or transfer the 
associated G oOs to any other entity than the operator of the electrolyser under 
the PPA.23 As already pointed out in the document, to avoid double counting, 
if GoO are issued for renewable electricity sourced by the RFNBO producer it 
must be ensured that all GoO connected to the amounts of electricity 
consumed in the installation producing RFNBOs are cancelled. The 
cancellation can be performed , for instance, by competent authorities 
designated by the Member State or by the RFNBOs producer. 
 
A GoO shall be of the standard size of 1 MWh and be valid for 12 months after 
the production of the relevant energy unit. 
 
A GoO shall specify at least: 
1. The energy source from which the energy was produced and the start 
and end dates of production; 
2. The identity, location, type and capacity of the installation where the 
energy was produced; 
3. Whether the installation has benefited from investment support and 
whether the unit of energy has benefited in any other way from a 
national support scheme, and the type of support scheme; 
4. The date on which the installation became operational; 
5. The date and country of issue and a unique identification number. 
In the case electricity production occurs outside of the European Union 
territories and thus GoGs are not available , alternative Energy Attribute 
Certificates (EAC s) can be used . Here, relevant examples include Renewable 
Energy Certificates (REC s) in North America , Renewable Energy Guarantees 
of Origin (REGO) in the UK, International RECs (I-RECs) and Tradable 
Instruments for Global Renewables (TIGRs) across in many other countries 
in the World (Latin America, Africa, Asia) . Any other EACs shall ensure the 
same degree of robustness. 
The EACs shall report the same minimum amount of information provided for 
GoOs (Article 19 RED II) . 
In the case neither GoOs nor EACs are available , the RFNBOs producer shall 
be in the position to demonstrate : 
 
23 To enforce this, the Member State may decide to immediately cancel the associated electricity G oOs. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

1. The energy source from which the energy was produced and the start 
and end dates of production; 
2. The identity, location, type and capacity of the installation where the 
energy was produced; 
3. Whether the installation has benefited from investment support and 
whether the unit of energy has benefited in any other way from a 
national support scheme, and the type of support scheme; 
4. The date on which the installation became operational; 
5. The amount of electricity delivered to the RFNBOs production plant ; 
6. The date when the electricity has been delivered to the RFNBOs 
production plant; 
7. The date when the electricity has been used by the RFNBOs 
production plant. 
The requirements on GoOs also apply in cases where the conclusion of a 
renewables PPA is not required. 
 
Annex III: Implementation of bidding zone concept 
and curtailment in non -EU countries 
The provisions implemented in this document and based on the Commission 
Delegated Regulations 2023/1184 and 2023/1185 (RFNBOs Delegated Acts) 
refer to concepts and definitions set out in the European Union electricity 
market. However, given the fact that those provisions apply regardless of 
whether RFNBOs are produced inside or outside the territory of the European 
Union, ISCC provides guidelines on how to implement and apply key -concepts 
in non -EU countries. 
Implementation of the bidding zone concept 
 
As described, the RED II employs the term “bidding zone” to outline specific 
requirements with respect to electricity requirements and RFNBOs production 
(see chapters 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.3.2, and 4.3.3). The term “bidding zone” is 
defined in the Article 2(41) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council Member States as “the largest geographical 
area within which market participants are able to exchange energy without 
capacity allocation“ . Further related definitions can be sourced in Article 2 of 
the same Regulation. As a basic principle, in scenarios where these exact 
terms do not exist or do not apply (e.g. non -EU countries), equivalent and 
most similar concepts should be used . 
 
In order to assess whether a certain geographical zone should be considered 
a bidding zone equivalent, an approach following the criteria and rationale laid 
down in the Regulation (EU) 2019/943 should be followed. At first, if rules 
requiring the establishment of hourly price for electricity grid within a 
geographical area are in place, the above area can be considered a bidding 
zone equivalent. In the case those rules are not present, the physic al 

© ISCC System GmbH 

characteristics of the network shall be considered, namely if the electricity 
network is integrated or several separated networks are present. If there 
several networks are present , each network should be considered as a 
bidding zone for the purpose of the implementation of the methodology. 
If the electricity network of the country is integrated and there are no 
geographically differentiated electricity prices, the whole country may be 
considered as one bidding zone for the purpose of the implementation of the 
RFNBO delegated act . 

Figure 5 Guidance tree for bidding zone equivalent concept in non -EU countries 
Please note that the result of the guidance tree does not represent an official 
classification of bidding zone equivalent in non -EU countries. On the base of 
the provided data and info by the system user, the auditor shall take the 
decision whether a certa in geographical zone should be considered a bidding 
zone equivalent or not. 
 
Implementation of rules on curtailment 
 
Chapter 4.2.3 lays down the requiremen ts for system users to source fully 
renewable electricity through avoiding or reducing the need of downward 
redispatching of installations generating renewable electricity . Implementation 
of those requirements in third countries will require that: 
(1) a national or regional entity with the equivalent tasks of a National 
Transmission Operator is in place ( Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council ); 
(2) requirements and rules for redispatching downwards are equivalent to the 
ones defined in Article 13 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 . 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Annex IV: Requirements to verify eligible electricity 
sourcing 
 
Please note that the following table does not replace the ISCC Audit 
Procedure: auditor are indeed required to use ISCC Audit Procedures during 
audit. 
 
Requirement Verification guidance (examples) 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Proof that the electricity used to produce 
RFNBOs is measured independently 
from any amount of electricity used for 
different purposes. Layout plans that include electrical 
connections and metering systems. 
Verify that relevant data pertaining to 
the amount of electricity that is used to 
produce RFNBOs are measured and 
documented with (at least) hourly 
resolution. In particular, the following: 
▪ amount sourced from the grid that 
does not count as fully renewable as 
well as the proportion of renewable 
electricity in the grid; 
▪ amount sourced as fully renewable via 
eligible direct connections or from 
eligible on -site electricity generating 
installations; 
▪ amount sourced as fully renewable 
because the criteria for electricity from 
grids with a renewable energy share 
exceeding 90%; 
▪ amount sourced as fully renewable 
because the criteria for electricity from 
grids with emission intensities lower 
than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ; 
▪ amount sourced as fully renewable 
because the criteria on additionality, 
temporal correlation and geographical 
correlation; 
▪ amount of renewable electricity 
generated by the installations 
generating renewable electricity, 
regardless of whether they are directly 
connected to an electrolyser and 
regardless of whether the renewable 
electricity is used for the production of 
RFNBO or for other purposes. Electricity metering system, internal 
company documentation system. 
Verify that the relevant data referred to: 
▪ amount of renewable electricity 
generated by all directly connected 
installations (including on -site), Electricity metering system, internal 
company documentation system. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

▪ amount of electricity generated by all 
installations that are covered by 
PPA(s) concluded by the RFNBO 
producer, 
▪ amount of electricity generated by 
installations owned by the RFNBO 
producer regardless of whether the 
renewable electricity is used to 
produce RFNBOs or for other 
purposes, 
are measured and documented with (at 
least) hourly resolution. 
Verify that the relevant data referred to: 
▪ the amount of RFNBOs produced , 
and 
▪ the amount of any other products 
produced that do not qualify as 
RFNBOs 
are measured and documented with (at 
least) hourly resolution . Internal company documentation 
system. 
PARTIALLY RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY 
Evidence showing the average share of 
electricity from renewable sources in the 
country the RFNBO producing 
installation is located in, as measured 
two years before the year in question. Statistics about the share of renewable 
electricity in the grid drawn from reliable 
sources (e.g., country’s energy office, 
grid operator, Eurostat SHARES). 
FULLY RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY 
1. DIRECT CONNECTION 
Verify that a direct line/connection 
between the RES producer and the 
RFNBOs production plant is in place. On-site audit, layout plans showing 
electrical connections. 
a) Ensure that the electricity producing 
installation not connected to the grid 
 
or 
 
b) ensure that no electricity from the grid 
is counted as if it were coming from the 
direct connection. a) Verify that no connection with the grid 
is in place (via on -site audit, layout plans 
showing electrical connections and 
metering systems). 
 
b) Verify that there is a correctly 
calibrated - smart metering system in 
place that ensures no electricity flows 
from the grid to the RFNBOs producing 
installation were counted as having 
come via the direct line (via on -site 
audit, layout plans showing el ectrical 
connections and metering systems). 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Ensure that the energy source used to 
produce electricity is renewable, not of 
biological origin, and not from a storage 
unit. On-site visit, satellite imagery (e.g. 
remote sensing), GoOs or similar 
(EACs) if available. 
Ensure that the installation generating 
electricity came into operation not 
earlier than 36 months before the 
installation producing RFNBOs. Commissioning documents or operation 
permits for installation(s) generating 
electricity. 
In case additional production capacity 
was added to an existing installation 
producing RFNBOs: Ensured that the 
additional production capacity was 
added a at the same site and took place 
no later than 36 months after the initial 
installation came into operation. Commissioning documents or operation 
permits for installation(s) producing 
RFNBOs. 
2. ELECTRICITY FROM A GRID WITH RENEWABLE 
ENERGY SHARE EXCEEDING 90% 
Ensure that the RFNBOs production 
plant is located in a bidding zone where 
the proportion of renewable electricity 
exceeds 90% in the previous calendar 
year. Statistics about the share of renewable 
electricity in the bidding zone drawn 
from reliable sources (e.g. ENTSO -E 
website, Eurostat SHARES, official 
national statistics). 
In the case the concept of bidding zone 
equivalent (outiside of the EU territories) 
is used, ensure that the methodology is 
properly followed. Electricity data from the relevant grid 
operator (establishment of an hourly 
price for electricity in the selected 
geographical area, physical 
characteristics of the network). 
Ensure that the number of full load 
hours of RFNBOs production is limited 
to the share of renewable electricity in 
the bidding zone. Statistics about the share of renewable 
electricity in the bidding zone drawn 
from reliable sources (e.g. ENTSO -E 
website). Internal documentation about 
use of the eligible electricity for RFNBOs 
production (e.g. via metering system), 
amounts of produced RFNBOs and the 
amounts of any other products produced 
that do not qualify as RFNBOs 
(documentation of operating hou rs). 
Ensure that if GoOs are used, those are 
in line with the related requirements and 
canceled once the electricity claimed in 
those has been used. Proof of cancellation (either from the 
electricity producer of from the 
competent body deisgnated by the 
Member State). 
3. ELECTRICITY VIA A GRID WITH AN EMISSION 
INTENSITY LOWER THAN 18 gCO 2EQ/MJ 
Ensure that the RFNBOs production 
plant is located in a bidding zone where 
where the emission intensity of 
electricity is lower than 18 gCO 2eq/MJ in 
at least one calendar year of the last six 
preceding calendar years. GoOs document. Verify that either the 
correct value for EU Member State is 
correctly used (up -to-date values from 
reliable source, e.g. the Annex of the 
Commission Implementing Regulation 
2023/1185) or the calculation 
emthodology has been correctly 
perform ed. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

Ensure that the sourced electricity is 
substantiated by PPAs. Verify if PPAs 
with renewable electricity installations 
cover at least the amount of electricity 
counted as fully renewable and that 
these are valid for the period during 
which the respective amount of 
electricity is sourced. PPAs, internal documentation. 
Verify that the criteria on geographical 
correlation have been met. See the section “Geographical 
Correlation”. 
Verify that the criteria on temporal 
correlation have been met. See the section “Temporal Correlation”. 
Ensure that if GoOs are used, those are 
in line with the related requirements and 
canceled once the electricity claimed in 
those has been used. GoOs documents and their Proof of 
cancellation (either from the electricity 
producer of from the competent body 
deisgnated by the Member State). 
4. ELECTRICITY FROM THE GRID AVOIDING OR REDUCING 
THE NEED OF DOWNWARD REDISPATCHING OF 
INSTALLATIONS GENERATING RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY 
Ensure that power -generating 
installations using renewable energy 
sources were redispatched downwards. Evidence from the national transmission 
system operator. 
Verify that the electricity consumed for 
the production of RFNBOs reduced the 
need for redispatching by a 
corresponding amount. Evidence from the national transmission 
system operator. 
5. ELECTRICITY VIA THE GRID WITH FURTHER 
REQUIREMENTS 
Verify that the criteria on geographical 
correlation have been met. See the section “ Geographical 
Correlation ”. 
Verify that the criteria on temporal 
correlation have been met. See the section “ Temporal Correlation ”. 
Verify that the criteria on additionality 
have been met. See the section “ Additionality ”. 
ADDITIONALITY 
Verify that the electricity sourced is 
substantiated by PPAs. PPAs, company metering systems. 
 
Check if PPAs with renewable electricity 
installations covering at least the 
amount of electricity counted as fully 
renewable are concluded and that these 
are valid for the period during which the 
respective amount of electricity is 
sourced. 
Verify that the electricity is 
a) produced from eligible sources , GoOs or similar, PPAs, Self -
Declaration. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

b) effectively produced in the 
installations stated in the PPAs. 
Verify if and when capacity has been 
added to the initial installation producing 
RFNBOs. Capacity that was added at 
the same site and not later than 36 
months after the initial installation came 
into operation shall be counted as if it 
came into operation at the same time as 
the initial capacity. Commissioning documents or operation 
permits for installation(s) producing 
RFNBOs. 
For installations producing RFNBOs 
that came into operation on or after 01 
January 2028 or for any RFNBO 
production after 01 January 2038: 
verify that renewable electricity 
installations have come into operation 
not earlier than 36 months before the 
installation producing RFNBOs. Commissioning documents or operation 
permits for installation(s) generating 
electricity, PPAs, GOs or similar. 
For installations producing RFNBOs 
that came into operation on or after 01 
January 2028 or for any RFNBO 
production after 01 January 2038 : verify 
that the renewable electricity 
installations under PPA(s) have not 
received support in the form of operating 
aid or investment aid, excluding support 
received by installations before the 
repowering and support that does not 
constitute net support, such as support 
that is fully repaid. Verify that the renewable electricity 
installations under the PPAs have not 
received support in the form of operating 
aid or investment aid (e.g. via statement 
of competent authority), excluding 
support received by installations before 
a repowering ( e.g. via document 
regarding the commissioning or 
operation permit after the repowering ) 
which required an investment exceeding 
30% of the investment that would be 
needed to build a similar new installation 
(e.g. via financial assessment report) 
and support that does not constitute net 
support, such as support that is fully 
repaid (e.g. via statement of competent 
authority). 
GEOGRAPHICAL CORRELATION 
Verify if documents are provided that 
show the location of the installations 
producing renewable electricity under 
the PPAs . PPAs. 
Verify if the installation producing 
renewable electricity is located : 
a) in the same bidding zone as the 
installation producing RFNBOs, or 
b) in an interconnected onshore bidding 
zone c) in an offshore bidding zone 
interconnected to the installation 
producing RFNBOs. GoOs or similar (e.g. EACs), PPAs, 
appropriate documentation of the 
location(s) of the renewable electricity 
generating installation(s) and the 
location of the installation producing 
RFNBOs. 
Verify if electricity produced in those 
installations falling under b) is only Transparent and region -specific source 
for electricity prices. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

claimed as fully renewable during time 
periods for which the price for electricity 
on the day -ahead market is equal or 
higher in the pricing zone of the 
electricity producing installation. 
In the case the concept of bidding zone 
equivalent (outiside of the EU territories) 
is used, ensure that the proposed 
methodology is properly followed. Electricity data from the relevant grid 
operator (establishment of an hourly 
price for electricity in the selected 
geographical area, physical 
characteristics of the network). 
If additional criteria on geographical 
correlation are mandated from the EU 
Member State where the RFNBOs 
producer is located, those must be met 
accordingly. Verify compliance with the national law. 
TEMPORAL CORRELATION 
Until 31 December 2029: 
a) verify that RFNBO is produced during 
the same calendar month as the 
renewable electricity produced in own 
installations or in installations under 
renewable PPA(s). 
b) In case renewable electricity is drawn 
from a storage asset, verify that (1) the 
storage asset is located behind the 
same network connection point as the 
installation producing RFNBOs, (2) the 
storage asset has been charged during 
the same calendar month in w hich the 
electricity under the PPA has been 
produced. On-site audit, site layout plans showing 
electrical connections, metering 
systems as well as location and 
connection points of storage asset, GOs 
or similar, plant production reports, 
transparent and understandable (online) 
smart metering tool, company int ernal 
documentation system. 
From 1 January 2030: 
a) verify that RFNBO is produced during 
the same one -hour period as the 
renewable electricity produced in own 
installations or in installations under 
renewable PPA(s). 
b) In case renewable electricity is drawn 
from a storage asset, verify that (1) the 
storage asset is located behind the 
same network connection point as the 
installation producing RFNBOs, (2) the 
storage asset has been charged during 
the same one -hour peri od in which the 
electricity under the PPA has been 
produced. On-site audit, site layout plans showing 
electrical connections, metering 
systems as well as location and 
connection points of storage asset, GOs 
or similar, plant production reports, 
transparent and understandable (online) 
smart metering tool, company int ernal 
documentation system. 
If RFNBOs is produced during a one -
hour period where the clearing price of 
electricity resulting from single day -
ahead market coupling in the bidding 
zone is lower or equal to EUR 20 per Reliable source of day ahead electricity 
prices in the bidding zone (e.g. ENTSO -
E) and price of an allowance to emit one 
tonne of CO 2 equivalent. 

© ISCC System GmbH 

MWh or lower than 0,36 times the price 
of an allowance to emit one tonne of 
CO 2 equivalent during the relevant 
period, temporal correlation is always 
met. 
Verify if the EU M ember State where the 
RFNBOs production plant is located has 
implemented hourly correlation already 
after 1 July 2027. Verify compliance with the national law.