Nick Evans 
Deyana Kocher 
Nora Kögel 
Matthias Duwe 
 
 13 September 2023 The landscape of n ational climate 
framework laws in E urope 
A status update - Summer 2023 
Ecologic Institut e 

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 
i 
 Conta ct 
Nick Evans 
Researcher 
Ecologic Institut e 
Pfalzburger Straße 43/44 
10717 Berlin 
E-Mail:  
Suggested citation 
Evans , Nick, Deyana Kocher , Nora Kögel , Matthias Duwe (2023 ): The landscape of national 
climate framework laws in Europe : A status update. Ecologic Institut e, Berlin . 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank Charlotte Billingham, Zoltán Massay -Kosubek, and Erica Hope 
from the European Climate Foundation (ECF) for their valuable comments and input. 
 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 
ii 
 Contents 
 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 1 
 A dynamic landscape ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 2 
 A diverse landscape ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 2 
 Deep dive into five ‘good practice’ provisions ................................ ............................ 3 
4.1 Long -term (net -zero) emissions reduction targets ................................ ............ 3 
4.2 Emission budgets ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 5 
4.3 Long -term planning ................................ ................................ ............................... 6 
4.4 Accountabil ity mechanisms ................................ ................................ ................. 7 
4.5 Green budgeting ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
4.6 Overview ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 10 
 Summary and key takeaways ................................ ................................ ....................... 11 
 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 12 
Annex: Climate framework laws around the world ................................ ........................... 14 

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Introduction 
National climate framework laws have become a com-
mon approach for establishing the governance ma-
chinery required to tackle the transition to a climate 
neutral society. While there is no fully agreed upon 
definition , we use the term ‘climate framework law’ (in 
the past referred to as ‘flagship’ law , see Townshend 
et al., 2011) to describe legal instruments passed by 
national legislatures that enshr ine a binding long-term 
vision for climate action and, to varying degrees, the 
necessary processes, institutional responsibilities, 
and other mechanisms to achieve it (Duwe and Bodle, 2020; McIlhennon and Brennan, 2023; 
Muinzer, 2020) . Such laws can be distinguished from other forms of climate legislation , espe-
cially those focusing on specific sectors as well as other non -legislative instruments, like strat-
egies or executive actions. 
As of August 2023, nearly half of European countries have a climate framework law as 
defined above and others are on the way . While no two laws are the same, they tend to draw 
on a set of common elements, such as targets, planning, monitoring, expert advisory bodies, 
institutional arrangements, and participation (Averchenkova and Lázaro -Touza, 2020; Duwe 
and Evans, 2020; World Bank, 2020) . Although not required by EU regulation , climate frame-
work laws are one way to operationalise the EU -wide target of net -zero emissions by 2050 at a 
national level (CAN Europe, 2022) . A closer look at the substance of these laws thereby offers 
a sense of national and public ownership and agenda -setting as well as European national 
governments’ commitment to the common EU project of climate neutrality . 
To document and a ssess the different qualities of these laws in Europe as they are adopted, 
Ecologic Institute has developed a Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix .1 This online re-
source aims to collect, organize, and present information on the status and substance of na-
tional climate framework laws in Europe, currently encompassing the 32 European Environment 
Agency (EEA) member countries plus the United Kingdom. The matr ix presents a side -by-side 
comparison of existing laws and their provisions. Importantly, to provide a comprehensive pic-
ture of the dynamic landscape of climate legislation in Europe, the matrix also lists climate laws 
which may not qualify as ‘true’ frame work laws in full .2 The resource is publicly available and is 
managed by Ecologic Institute . It undergoes continuous crowd -sourcing quality control and ver-
ification of accuracy through the input of its users, who are invited to submit comments and 
edits f or review. 
In this memo we offer a readout of key information contained in the Info -Matrix and thus a brief 
update on the status and substance of national climate laws in Europe , with a focus on frame-
work laws . The following Section 2 considers the growth in climate framework laws over time , 
whereas Sect ion 3 provides a summary assessment of their diversity. Section 4 then investi-
gates five main provisions, often referred to as ‘good practice’ elements, in more detail. Section 
5 concludes with several key takeaways. 
 
1 To view and explore the Climate Framework Laws Info -Matri x visit:  . 
2 In this paper, we use the term s ‘climate laws’ and ‘climate framework laws’ differently. The former refers to 
all laws covered by the Info -Matrix whereas the latter is a specific subset defined in Box 1 -in short, while 
all framework laws are climate laws, not all climate laws are framework laws . Box 1: How we define ‘climate frame-
work law ’ 
Climate framework laws are legal instru-
ments passed by legislatures that en-
shrine a binding long -term objective for 
climate action and, at least to some de-
gree, the necessary proce sses, institu-
tional responsibilities, and other mecha-
nisms to achieve it. 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 A dynamic landscape 
Across the 32 Europ ean Environment Agency (EEA) member countries plus the United King-
dom (UK ), 22 governments have enacted some form of climate law, albeit only 15 of these 
include objectives beyond a time horizon for 2030 . In addition, t he Hungarian law enshrines a 
2050 net -zero target but no other concrete provisions for managing the transition to climate 
neutrality . Thus, only 14 of the existing climate laws in Europe qualify as ‘true’ framework laws 
as per our definition introduced above in Box 1 . 
Even a quick look at the map in Figure 1 shows the regional disparity ; most laws are concen-
trated in the central and northern European countries , with the recent notable exceptions of 
Greece, Portugal, and Spain . However, t he landscape is continuously in flux as new laws are 
adopted and existing laws revised to account for international, EU, and national developments. 

in Estonia, Latvia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Turkey.3 
Figure 1: Landscape of national climate (framework ) laws in Europe - status as of August 2023 
 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023): Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix ; (*) the Hungari an 
law enshrines a 2050 net-zero target but no other concrete provisions for managing the transition to climate 
neutrality and thus does not qualify as a framework law as per the definition in Box 1 above. 
Most climate framework laws have been revised at l east once, often to account for a change in 
national ambition in emission reductions. At the time of writing, at least four laws are currently 
undergoing revision -Austria, Bulgaria, Germany, and Liechtenstein. In Austria, the revision 
was intended to enshr ine the country’s target of net -zero emissions by 2040 as spelled out in 
its national long -term strategy. However, its adoption ran up against political headwinds, and 
the old law expired at the end of 2020. While the process is still ongoing, this makes A ustria 
one of the only European countries that has backpedalled or weakened a climate law. Past 
 
3 At the time of writing, civil society campaigns were underway in, e.g., Italy and Poland to raise nat ional at-
tention on the need for a national climate framework law , but these had not yet led to a clear commitment 
by government . 

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 revisions to other national laws served to strengthen and expand frameworks by among other 
things increasing overall target ambition (e.g., Denmark, Ireland, Ge rmany), adding new expert 
oversight (e.g., France), or integrating a budget approach (e.g., Ireland) (Ecologic Institute, 
2023; Nash and Steurer, 2022; Torney, 2021) . 

criticized by civil society and the government’s own Council of Experts for weakening the exist-
ing framework by dismantling a unique system of sector -specific accounting and monitoring 
(see also section 4.4 below ).4 Discussions are still ongoing as of summer 2023 but should the 
German Bundestag pass the new amendment law it would mark another instance of a national 
long-term frameworks being watered down. 
The spread of laws that enshrine long -term target , i.e., those with a post -2030 perspective, has 
picked up pace over the last five years (see Figure 2). This includes the passage of the EU 
Climate Law in June 2021 -to date, the o nly supranational law of its kind. The first European 
country to enact such a law was the UK in 2008 with the Climate Change Act. This also includes 
the Hungarian law, which as mentioned above, serves solely to establish national targets with 
few other sup porting provisions. 
Figure 2: Growth in post -2030 climate laws across Europe 
 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023): Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix ; (*) the Hungarian 
law enshrines a 2050 net -zero target but no other con crete provisions for managing the transition to climate 
neutrality and thus does not qualify as a framework law as per the definition in Box 1 above. 
This trend is not limited to Europe an countries; c limate framework laws aimed at the long -term 
transformat ion of the economy are spreading globally (see Figure 3). According to the Gran-
tham Institute Climate Laws Database, as of April 2023, 13 countries out side of Europe have a 
framework law with some form of long -term climate target. This includes seven of the eleven 
non-European Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) member 
countries. Notably, most of these laws came about only in th e last three years -with eight 
adopted in 2021 alone. A full list of non -European laws adopted through April 2023 can be 
found in the annex to this memo. 
 
4 See  -klima -103.html , accessed 18 April 2023. 

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Figure 3: Landscape of climate framework laws around the world - status as of April 2023 
 
Source: Data compiled the Grantham Research Institute (2023) : Climate Laws of the World Database

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 A diverse landscape 
Some common provisions notwithstanding, climate framework laws come in man y shapes 
and sizes, and this diversity is especially apparent among European countries. A growing 
body of literature identifies several ‘core elements ’ found in most laws (Duwe and Evans, 
2021; McIlhennon and Brennan, 2023; World Bank, 2020) . Among these included in the Cli-
mate Framework Law Info -Matrix are: (1) climate targets, (2) clear processes for stakeholder 
and publ ic engagement (2) policy planning instruments (e.g., long term strategies (LTS) and 
medium -term plans, such as national energy and climate plans (NECPs)), (3) independent ex-
pert bodies and (5) robust progress monitoring to enhance the accountability of gov ernment 
actions. Additional elements include coordinating commissions , risk and vulnerability assess-
ments, and sanctioning mechanisms. 
Together these provisions provide governments with the tools they need to manage the long -
term transition in their count ry by providing a signal for the direction and speed of change , a 
process for formulating policy to get there , opportunities to enhance buy -in and transparency 
through participation, and accountability mechanisms and expert oversight to ensure actions 
stay on track and are based on the best available science. 
Table 1: Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix categories 
Category Description Countries 

 A comprehensive climate framework law that organises 
national climate policy -making for the long -term trans-
formation . Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Ireland, Portugal 

 Law is missing one or more elements but still serves to 
structure some aspects of national climate policy -mak-
ing. Greece, Luxembourg, Ice-
land 

 Law does not serve as a framework for organising na-
tional climate policy -making (e.g., only enshrines a 
headline target) . Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, 
Malta, Liechtenstein , Lithua-
nia 

 Law exists but is out of date or 'expired' . Austria, Switzerland 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023): Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix 
Based on the existence and relative strength of these provisions across existing laws , the Cli-
mate Framework Law Info -Matrix outlines four categories : (1) fully comprehensive frame-
works, (2) less detailed laws with only some organisational power, (3) fledgling laws that typi-
cally enshrine a target with little surrounding inst itutional creation, and (4) out of date or ex-
pired laws.5 Notably, only categories 1 and 2 therefore count as ‘true’ framework laws under 
the definition used in this paper , and therefore the Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix in-
cludes laws that do not fully qualify . However, b ecause these can serve as a first step to-
wards more comprehensive legislation down the road (see, e.g., Torney, 2021) we 
 
5 These categories were developed for the Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix for the purpose of streamlin-
ing an assessment of laws and are based on underlying a ssessment criteria. The tree metaphor was cho-
sen intentionally to imply that framework laws can mature through revision and are often improved upon 
over time. For a full note on methodology refer to the Climate Framewor k Laws Info -Matrix here. 

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 intentionally include them. Table 1 provides an o verview of the categories and what they sig-
nify, alongside country examples . 
Assessing laws for their quality is a challenge due to differing national circumstances and po-
litical cultures. Moreover, just because something exists in a law does not mean tha t it has 
been implemented fully. On the flip side, countries without dedicated climate framework laws 
still have some of the same mechanisms often found in such laws enshrined either in broader 
legislation or established by governmental decree (Evans a nd Duwe, 2021) . For instance, 
Slovenia adopted a climate neutrality target in its overarching national Environmental Protec-
tion Act, which also establishes an expert council. 
While the four qualitative categories used by the Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix provide 
some orientation for the existing batch of laws in Europe, they do not capture all the complex-
ity and variation in legal frameworks. The assessment criteria, for instance, do not consider 
the degree to which the laws establish institutional responsibilities , and they do not deal with 
climate adaptation or just transition. The categories nevertheless are an illustration of the vari-
ety found in the EU , with the symbols serving as a reminder of how frameworks are often re-
vised and improved upon over time . 
 Deep dive into five ‘good practice’ provisions 
In this section we dive deeper into five specific key provisions : (1) long -term (net-zero) emission 
reduction targets, (2) use of emissions budgets, (3) regular and reocc urring long -term planning, 
(4) robust accountability mechanisms , and (5) green budgeting and financial mainstreaming for 
climate mitigation . Table 4 in Section 4.6 provides a summary overview across all provisions. 
It is important to note that while these good practice provisions are commonly referred to the 
literat ure and by the civil society community as examples of strong or transformational govern-
ance practices (see Averchenkova et al., 2020; CAN Europe, 2022; Duwe and Evans, 2021; 
World Bank, 2020) , there is li ttle empirical evidence on their impact across countries (McIlhen-
non and Brennan, 20 23). Still, the fact that over time more and more European countries have 
incorporated these provisions in their own laws (see Velten et al., 2023, p. 170) is some indica-
tion that the ir added -value has been recognised by national governments. 
4.1 Long -term (net -zero) emission s reduction target s 
A clear long -term emissions reduction target, with at least a 30 -year horizon, is essential for 
national climate framework laws to effectively translate the spirit of the Paris Agreement into 
national ambition (Duwe and Bodle, 2020) . Targets can provide the government and society a 
‘clear direction of travel’ and also an indication of the speed of transformation for policy -makers 
and private actors (Aver chenkova et al., 2020) . Furthermore, a well -defined long-term target 
plays a pivotal role in integrating climate action across all pillars of economies, encouraging 
concerted efforts (Lockwood, 2021; Nash and Steurer, 2019) . 
As of the end of August 2023, fifteen European countries h ave a legally enshrined and binding 
long-term target emission reductions target (see Table 2). In most cases, the target comes in 
the form of a climate neutrality dat e by 2050 or earlier. Finland , Germany , and Sweden aim 
to be climate neutral at an earlier date than 2050, with Finland planning for 2035 net -zero and 
negative emissions thereafter and Germany for 2045 net -zero and negative emissions after 
2050. Portugal’s law notes that the government will consider pursu ing a 2045 climate neutrality 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 goal. Iceland aims for carbon neutrality by 2040. Although a full assessment is beyond the 
scope of this paper the way in which climate neutrality is formulated in the language of each 
law differs , see Table 3. 
Alongside their climate neutrality target, five countries quantify long -term emission reductions 
in their laws (i.e., Finland, France, Portugal, Sweden, and the United Kingdom). Add itionally, 
although the laws of the Netherlands and Norway do not include a formal climate neutrality 
target, both countries aim for emission reductions of 95% and 90 -95% by 2050, respectively. 
Among the countries with a net -zero target, 11 also present in terim GHG emission reductions 
targets for 2030 and/or 2040. 
Table 2: Long -term targets in European climate framework laws 
Country Net-zero target year Long -term reduction target Long -term 
removal 
target 
Denmark 2050, at the latest n/a n/a 
Finland 2035, negative emissions thereafter -90% (2050 vs. 1990), aiming 
for -95% n/a 
France 2050 -83.3% (2050 vs. 1990)1 n/a 
Germany 2045, negative emissions after 2050 n/a n/a 
Greece 2050 n/a n/a 
Hungary 2050 n/a n/a 
Iceland 2040 n/a n/a 
Ireland 2050 n/a n/a 
Luxembourg 2050, at the latest n/a n/a 
Netherlands n/a -95% (2050 vs. 1990) n/a 
Norway n/a 90-95% (2050 vs. 1990) n/a 
Portugal 2050, possibly 2045 -90% (2050 vs. 2005) 13 Mt 
CO2eq 
(2045 -
2050) 
Spain before 2050 or in the shortest possible 
time n/a n/a 
Sweden 2045, at the latest -85% (2045 vs. 1990) n/a 
United King-
dom 2050 -100% (2050 vs. 1990) n/a 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023) : Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix 
Note: for non -English laws without an official translation the authors u sed translation software Deepl; (1) tar-
get formulated as 'a factor of more than six' 
Portugal is the only country that enshrines a target for long -term GHG emission removal in a 
climate law. It aims to remove at least 13 MtCO2eq in the LULUCF sector on ave rage between 
2045 and 2050. No laws include targets for short -term GHG removals. 
Nine countries include information about a process for revising targets in their laws. Generally, 
countries aim to comply with EU and international obligations for target revi sion. Denmark, 
France, and Greece specifically set a revision process every five years. The laws in Portugal, 
Spain, and the UK contain somewhat vague language on how new scientific knowledge about 
climate change could trigger a process for revision. Accor ding to the Finnish climate law, the 
government must monitor the ‘adequacy’ of targets, but this is likewise not further operational-
ized. Such target revision clauses have the potential to increase national ambition overtime -
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 especially if combined with a ‘ no backsliding’ clause (see Section 4.4). At the very least, a target 
revision cycle creates the basis for a regular national discussion on climate ambition. 
In addition to legislating for climate neutrality, some countries also include additional thematic 
objectives in their laws. France, for example, provides numerous sectoral objectives for renew-
able energy, energy efficiency, fossil fuels, nuclear and hydrogen . Germany plans for climate -
neutral governmental activity by 2030 and Greece includes a coal phase -out target by 2028. 
Table 3: How climate neutrality targets are formulated in law 
Country Net-zero target formulation in law 
Denmark [...] to achieve a climate -neutral society by 2050 at the latest (Art. 1.1) 
Finland […] so that greenhouse gas emissions are at most equal to emissions in 2035 at the 
latest and that emissions will increase and emissions will continue to decrease even af-
ter that. (Art. 2.1) 
France […] to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 by dividing greenhouse gas emissions by a 
factor of more than six between 1990 and 2050. (Art. 1.2 or Article L100 -4 of the En-
ergy Code) 
Germany By the year 2045, greenhouse gas emissions shall be reduced to the point of net 
greenhouse gas neutrality. After the year 2050, negative greenhouse gas emissions 
are to be achieved. (Art. 3.2) 
Greece […] ensure the country's gradual transition to climate neutrality by 2050, in the most en-
vironmentally sustainable, socially equitable and cost -effective way. (Art. 1.1) 
Hungary Hungary will achieve complete climate neutrality by 2050 (Art. 3.4) 
Iceland The objectives of this law are: […] e. to achieve carbon neutrality no later than the year 
2040. (Art. 1) 
Ireland […] pursue and achieve, by no later than the end of the year 2050, the transition to a 
climate resilient, biodiversity rich, environmentally sustainable and climate neutral econ-
omy (Art 5. or Art. 3.1 of the Principal Act) 
Luxembourg […] long -term objecti ve of climate neutrality, which consists of achieving ‘net zero emis-
sions’ in Luxembourg by 2050 at the latest. (Art. 4.2) 
Portugal The Portuguese State undertakes to achieve climate neutrality by 2050, which trans-
lates into a neutral balance between gree nhouse gas emissions and the sequestration 
of these gases by the various sinks. (Art. 18.1) 
Without prejudice to the provisions of the previous number, the Government is study-
ing, until 2025, the anticipation of the climate neutrality goal, with a view to the commit-
ment to climate neutrality by 2045 at the latest. (Art. 18.2) 
Spain Before 2050 and in any case, in the shortest possible time, Spain must achieve climate 
neutrality, in order to comply with internationally assumed commitments. (Art. 3.2) 
Sweden The goal must be for Sweden to have no net emissions (reach net zero emissions) of 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere by 2045 at the latest, in order to subsequently 
achieve negative emissions. (Art. 5.2) 
United King-
dom It is the duty of the Secretary of State to ensure that the net UK carbon account for the 
year 2050 is at least 100% lower than the 1990 baseline. (Art. 1.1) 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023) : Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix 
Note: for non -English la ws without an official translation the authors used translation software Deepl; (1) tar-
get formulated as 'a factor of more than six' 
4.2 Emission budgets 
Emission budgets, and in particular sectoral emission budget, help divide up an overarching 
future target into concrete reduction periods . This helps implementation in the medium term by 
offering a clear trajectory for emissions with interim targets based on the length of the budget 
periods (Guy et al., 2023; Rüdinger, 2018) . 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 An emissions budget approach is becoming more and more common in climate laws, the Irish 
revision from 2021 introduced sectoral budgets and more recent laws in Greece and Portugal 
also apply a budgeting system. Seven countries (eight including Austria’s no w expired law) 
have integrated some form of a budget approach. Most operate on a five -year cycle set 10 -15 
years in advance (e.g., France, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, United Kingdom). Luxembourg uses 
a ten -year cycle and Germany applies annual emission budg ets. 
All but the United Kingdom and Portugal breakout the emissions budget into sectoral limits. 
The existing German climate framework law sets annual budgets for the energy, industry, 
transport, buildings, agriculture and waste management and other secto rs for the period 2021 -
2030. This approach is unique among national climate laws in Europe, as it is the only one to 
prescribe annual sector -specific caps and thus a very detailed form of monitoring. However, 

June 2023 proposes to replace the obligation to comply with annual sectoral caps with an obli-
gation to comply with cross -sectoral annual emission levels. As mentioned , this move has been 
strongly criticized be cause it has the potential to water down the German framework by dimin-
ishing accountability on the part of relevant ministries , e.g., transport, buildings, etc . (Ex-
pertenrat für Klimafragen, 2023) . Because ministries ar e regularly managed by different parties, 
often with divergent priorities this may undermine the successful and consistent integration of 
climate across government. 
4.3 Long -term planning 
A vision or plan with long -term scenarios for the necessary restructurin g of the economy to 
achieve the long -term climate goal is important so that the appropriate measures can be iden-
tified and implemented (Rüdinger et al., 2018; Velten et al., 2022) . Article 4 of the Paris Agree-
ment calls on all countries to communicate ‘long-term low greenhouse gas emission develop-
ment strategies ’. EU Member States are required under the Governance Regulation to produce 
a long -term strategy (LTS) every ten years and are supposed to update these strategies every 
five years ‘where necessary ’. 
While some laws translate these obligations into national law, frequent long-term planning is 
surprisingly missing from the landscape of climate framework laws in Eur ope compared to other 
good practice elements. While nine of the existing laws have some provision requiring govern-
ment to produce and revise a long -term strategy or pla n, only four countries require more fre-
quent, five -year updates -France , Ireland , Malta , Spain . 
The German Climate Protection Plan 2050 (LTS) is mentioned in the German law, but a cycle 
of review and revision is not legally enshrined . This indicates a current weakness of the law, as 
updates of the medium -term climate protection programs are on ly required after each update 

climate protection law, this mandatory link is to be abolished. Without a regularly updated LTS 
it is more difficult to do the backc asting required to make sound policy decisions in the short 
term. 
In France , the national low carbon development strategy is connected to the five -year emission 
budget schedule and must be updated accordingly. In Ireland , a long -term strategy must be 
submitted to the government for approval by the responsible ministry every five years. The law 
further states that the strategy must include information on reductions and removals by sector 
for a 30 -year time horizon. 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 4.4 Accountability mechanisms 
While there are many forms of accountability or monitoring mechanisms , three stand out as 
particularly strong forms : (1) ‘no backsliding’ clauses, (2) regular progress monitoring by gov-
ernment, ( 3) ‘action triggers ’ that require the government to enact additional poli cies when pro-
gress is found to be lacking, and ( 4) the establishment of an independent expert council or 
advisory body with a formal watchdog role in policy -making. 
‘No backsliding’ clause 
Four laws contain ‘no backsliding’ causes . In Denmark , new climate targets cannot be less 
ambitious than the most recently set ones. Similarly, according to the German climate law, 
climate targets may be raised but not lowered. In Portugal , revision is carried out to increase 
a target’s ambition, while Spain may only cont emplate an upward update of the pathways for 
reducing GHG emissions and increasing carbon removals. 
Progress monitoring by government 
Most national climate framework laws in Europe, especially those with long -term climate tar-
gets, include some form of gove rnmental progress monitoring mechanism towards national ob-
jectives although in many cases th is serves to fulfil EU reporting requirements . National -level 
monitoring is found less frequently and is done on an annual or biennial basis and usually by 
the ministry responsible for climate policy. In Germany , an annual report on the implementation 
of the climate action programs in each economic sector is submitted to the German Bundestag. 
Similarly, in Denmark an annual status update provides the basis for additional policy -making. 
‘Action triggers ’ 
The laws in four European countries have clear language establishing some form of an ‘action 
trigger ’. These mechanisms require the adoption of additional measures when monitoring 
shows that progress is lagging. For instance, In the Netherlands , the law simply states that if 
progress towards targets is found to be missing ‘measures are taken ’. However, elsewhere the 
action trigger is a more developed process . In France, a report by the High Council for Climate 
(HCC), an independent scientific advisory body, can require the government to propose new 
policies as a response. The Danish law includes a provision called ‘duty to act ’. In each annual 
climate program me, the Ministry must provide an assessment of progress towards targets; if 
progress is deemed insufficient the programme must also present new initiatives. 
The provision for triggering measures at the sectoral level in the German law, the so -called 
‘Sofortprogramm ’, is unique among European climate framework laws . Should a sector be 
proven to exceed its annual emissions budget, the ministry concerned is obliged to propose 

German Climate Protection Act, new measures by the government are required if, on a forecast 
basis, it is determined for two consecutive years that the overall cross -sector emissions budget 
for 2021 -2030 will not be met -a development that was cri tically assessed by the Expert Coun-
cil on Climate Issues in its 2022 review report (Expertenrat für Klimafragen, 2023) . 
Independent expert councils 
Independent expert councils or advisory bodies are a common provision in European climate 
laws, although these advisory bodies take many forms and are not always best set up to have 
an impact on policy (Weaver et al., 2019) . There is some evidence that those with a clear man-
dated role in climate policy -making to which the government must respond in some form are 
better positioned to influence policy -making (Evans and Duwe, 2021) . Independent climate 
councils are a component of 13 of the 22 European national climate framework laws. 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Important ly, independent climate councils are composed solely of scientists and operate inde-
pendently from government. Some laws also include stakeholder or governmental commissions 
that similarly serve an advisory role. 
The governments of Denmark, and the United K ingdom are required to both consult and re-
spond to the independent council . For example, the Danish Climate Council must comment on 
each annual climate programme and accompanying climate status report and the government 
must provide a response to these rec ommendations. In the United Kingdom the Commission 
on Climate Change has a dedicated role in proposing the emissions budget and produces an 
annual progress report. The Secretary of State must respond to ‘the points raised ’ in the report. 
German law provide s for the Council of Experts to prepare a progress report every two years, 
conduct an annual quality control of the emissions data reported by the Federal Environment 
Agency, and issue emission reduction statements on specific measures. However, the govern-

amend the Climate Protection Act, however, it must consider proposals from the Council of 
Experts in climate protection programs and measures for remediation. 
In Greece and Portugal , the expert council plays a slightly more limited role, at least under the 
provisions of the climate law, while in Spain the government must respond and participate in 
the public debate for an annual report, evaluating and making reco mmendations on energy and 
climate change policies and regulations. In Sweden , the government is only somewhat required 
to consult the advisory body as the latter must provide an assessment of the government's 
climate policy action plan. 
4.5 Green budgeting 
Green budgeting is not widely found in European climate framework laws. However, as a recent 
survey by the European Commission shows, at least 12 countries practice some form of green 
budgeting, even if it is not legally binding in a climate framework law. These include ‘budget 
tagging’ to determine which budget measures contribute positively or negatively to climate 
goals (e.g., Austria, France, Sweden), and assessments of the climate impacts of budget ele-
ments (e.g., Denmark, France, Finland, Netherlands, Sweden) (European Commission, 2023) . 
The European Commission study uses a narrow defin ition of green budgeting, and there are 
no provisions in existing climate framework laws that would qualify. Five laws are nevertheless 
worth mentioning in t he context of financial mainstreaming more generally. 
The laws in Sweden and Norway align climate planning with the state budget proposal sched-
ule to integrate climate action considerations with public spending. The Spanish climate law 
includes provisions on disinvestment of fossil fuels as well as an ‘International Climate Finance 
Strategy ’. France’s law includes a special risk reporting obligation for the financial sector and 
requires a dedicated report on climate finance availability and needs attached to the budget 

The German law includes an obligation to ensure that fede ral investments and procurements 
are as climate -friendly as possible and provides for a CO 2 ‘shadow price ’ for this purpose. It 
also links reporting obligations to the budget cycle. However, this does not mean that sustain-
ability criteria are systematically applied in budget planning or that an assessment of compati-
bility with KSG climate goals takes place. In a position paper of June 2023, the German civil 
society calls for the concrete linking of climate targets with the Federal Budget Code and the 
investment guidelines of the special funds of the federal and state governments, as well as an 
obligation to rev iew the compatibility of public spending with the transition to climate neutrality 
(Klima -Allianz Deutschland, 2023 ). 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Excluded from Table 4, several laws establish some form of funding mechanism for climate 
mitigation actions, often within the context of the sale of allowances under the EU Emissions 
Trading System (ETS) . This includes the National Climate Change Program in Lithuania, the 
National Green Investment Scheme (NGSI) in Bulgaria, the Climate Fund in Iceland, the Cli-
mate Action Fund in Ireland, the Climate and Energy Fund in Luxembourg, the Climate Action 
Fund in Malta, and the Fund for Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency in Croatia . 
Likewise, the Greek law includes language on ‘financial resources ’, including provisions for 
where funding for climate action will come from and provisions on transparency and accounting 
and the Hungarian law calls on the government to issue Green Government Bonds. Notably, 
the laws in Liechtenstein and Switzerland introduce a carb on tax. 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 4.6 Overview 
Table 4: Summary of good practice provisions in European climate (framework) laws 
 (1) Long -term 
(net-zero) 
emissions re-
duction tar-
get 
(3) Long -term 
planning (4) Accountability mechanisms 
(5) Green 
budgeting ** Country (2) Emission 
budget Emission budget 
broken down by 
sector No backsliding 
clause Regular national 
progress monitor-
ing by government Action trigger Independent expert 
council that govern-
ment must consult or 
respond to 
Austria* 
Bulgaria 
Croatia 
Denmark 
Finland 
France ( ) 
Germany ( ) 
Greece 
Hungary 
Iceland 
Ireland 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
Liechtenstein 
Malta 
Netherlands 
Norway ( ) 
Portugal 
Spain ( ) 
Sweden ( ) 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Source: Data compiled from Ecologic Institute (2023): Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix 
Note: (*) The Austrian law expired at the end of 2020 and a revision has since been held up for political reasons. The information contained in this table is based on the expired 
law; (**) The existing provisions would not qualify based on the definition used in the European Commission (2023) survey on green budgeting.

 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Summary and k ey takeaways 
Several key takeaways can be drawn from the landscape of climate framework legislation in 
Europe as of August 2023: 
(1) Twenty -two European countries have some form of climate law in place, but only 15 
of these have a post -2030 -time horizon. Three laws are under revision and an additional six 
countries are currently developing a law. This is a growing trend, and the rate of legislation 
being adopted seems to have accelerat ed in recent years -a dynamic that is also apparent 
globally. In addition to national developments, the European Climate Law passed in 2021 is 
unique as the only supranational law of its kind and could serve both as an example and impe-
tus for further legisl ation among EU Member States. 
(2) Thirteen countries include a climate neutrality target in their law , but these targets 
require further clarity in many cases . Most of these aim for net -zero emissions by 2050, with 
the notable exceptions of Finland (2035) , Germany (2045), and Sweden (2045). Spain and 
Portugal leave the possibility of an earlier climate neutrality year open. Only a handful of coun-
tries qualify their net -zero date further by setting a binding absolute reduction target, and there 
is inconsistent reliance on international offsetting for reaching climate neutrality domestically. 
Notably, only Portugal has a long -term GHG removal target in its law. The lack of clarity on 
removals is particularly concerning and has been shown to be an information gap also when it 
comes to EU Member State long -term strategies (Velten et al., 2022) . A the very least, long -
term strategies should provide clarity on what a government means when it sets a 2050 or 
earlier net -zero date. 
(3) When it comes to good practice provision s, even long -standing frameworks show 
national variation . Long -term planning is a core component of nine laws, but the Danish Cli-
mate Act is a notable exceptio n. The Danish ‘Climate Policy Wheel’ or cycle enshrined in the 
law is aimed at in the country’s long -term climate neutrality ambition, but a provision for strategic 
policy planning post -2030 is not included. Of the eight national climate framework laws that 
establish emission budgets, fewer still break these down into sectoral limit s. The likely amend-
ments to the German Climate Protection Law that will get rid of the sectoral budgeting and 
monitoring system is an indication that a sector -specific approach, while good practice, is con-
tentious because it adds an extra layer of accounta bility for ministries. A concrete action trigger 
is apparent in only four of the 22 laws. 
Strong provisions to align public spending with climate goals are missing in all laws. Existing 
provisions are limited to aligning planning schedules with budget cyc les (such as Sweden) or 
climate finance strategies or reports (e.g. , Spain, France). 
 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 References 
Averchenkova , A., Fankhauser, S., and Finnegan, J. J. (2020). The impact of strategic climate legislation: Ev-
idence from expert interviews on the UK Climate Change Act. Climate Policy , 21(2), 251 -263. 
 
Averchenkova, A., and Lázaro -Touza, L. (2020). Legislating for a low carbon transition in Europe: Experi-
ences in the UK, France and Spain . 32. 
CAN Europe. (2022). Climate Laws in Europe: Essential for achieving climate neutrality . 
Duwe, M., and Bodle, R. (2020). ‘Paris Compati ble’ Climate Change Acts? National Framework Legislation in 
an International World. In T. L. Muinzer (Ed.), National Climate Change Acts: The Emergence, Form and 
Nature of National Framework Climate Legislation . Hart Publishing. 
 1509941742 
Duwe, M., and Evans, N. (2020). Climate Laws in Europe: Good Practices in Net -Zero Management . Ecologic 
Institute; European Climate Foundation. 
Duwe, M., and Evans, N. (2021). Professionalizing Climate Policy via Legislation (Policy Paper Series “Shap-
ing the Transition to a Low -Carbon Economy: Perspectives from Israel and Germany“, p. 32). Israel Public 
Policy Institute, Heinrich Böll Foundation. 
Ecologic Institute. (2023). Climate Framework Laws Info -Matrix . 
European Commission. (2023). Green bu dgeting in the EU: Key insights from the 2023 European Commis-
sion survey of green budgeting practices . 
Evans, N., and Duwe, M. (2021). Climate governance systems in Europe: The role of national advisory bod-
ies (p. 67). Ecologic Institute, IDDRI. 
Expertenra t für Klimafragen. (2023). Prüfbericht zur Berechnung der deutschen Treibhausgasemissionen für 
das Jahr 2022: Prüfung und Bewertung der Emissionsdaten gemäß § 12 Abs. 1 BundesKlimaschutzge-
setz. Expertenrat für Klimafragen.  
Grantham Research Institute. (2023). Climate Laws of the World Database . 
Guy, J., Shears, E., and Meckling, J. (2023). National models of climate governance among major emitters. 
Nature Climate Change .  -022-01589 -x 
Klima -Allian z Deutschland. (2023). Gemeinsame Forderungen zur KSG -Novelle: Abschwächung des Klima-
schutzgesetzes verhindern . Klima -Allianz Deutschland. 
Lockwood, M. (2021). Routes to credible climate commitment: The UK and Denmark compared. Climate Pol-
icy, 1-14. https: //doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2020.1868391 
McIlhennon, C., and Brennan, C. (2023). Climate Laws: What are the experts saying? Environmental Justice 
Network Ireland Climate Governance Observatory Policy Paper. 
Muinzer, T. L. (Ed.). (2020). National Climate Cha nge Acts: The Emergence, Form and Nature of National 
Framework Climate Legislation . Hart Publishing.  
Nash, S. L., and Steurer, R. (2019). Taking stock of Climate Change Acts in Europe: Living policy processes 
or symbol ic gestures? Climate Policy , 19(8), 1052 -1065.  
Nash, S. L., and Steurer, R. (2022). From symbolism to substance: What the renewal of the Danish climate 
change act tells us about the driving forces behind policy change. Environmental Politics , 31(3), 453 -477. 
 
Rüdinger, A. (2018). Best practices and challenges for effective climate governance frameworks: A case 
study on the French experience. IDDRI, Paris, France , 02/18, 38. 
Rüdinger, A., Voss -Stemping, J., Sartor, O., Duwe, M., and Averchenkova, A. (2018). Towards Paris -compat-
ible climate governance frameworks (pp. 1 -20). 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Torney, D. (2021). Comparative Assessment of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development (Amend-
ment) Act 2021 . Dublin City University Centre for Climate and Society. 
Townshend, T., Fankhauser, S., Matthews, A., Feger, C., Liu, J., and Narciso, T. (2011). Legislating Climate 
Change on a National Level. Environment: Science and Polic y for Sustainable Development , 53(5), 5 -17. 
 
Velten, E. K., Calipel, C., Duwe, M., Evans, N., Felthöfer, C., Hagemann, M., Hecke, J., Kahlen, L., Lalieu, S., 
McDonald, H., Pelekh, N., Pellerin -Carlin, T., Pestiau x, J., Ramotowski, K., Schöberlein, P., Schritt, H., 
Śniegocki, A., Stefańczyk, A., and Tarpey, J. (2023). State of EU Progress to Climate Neutrality: An indi-
cator -based assessment across 13 building blocks for a climate neutral future . European Climate Ne utral-
ity Observatory (ECNO). 
Velten, E. K., Evans, N., Spasova, D., Duwe, M., de la Vega, R., Duin, L., and Branner, H. (2022). Charting a 
path to net zero: An assessment of national long -term strategies in the EU . Ecologic Institute. 
Weaver, S., Lötjönen, S., and Ollikainen, M. (2019). Overview of national climate change advisory councils 
(3/2019; p. 40). The Finnish Climate Change Panel. 
World Bank. (2020). World Bank Reference Guide to Climate Change Framework Legislation . World Bank. 
 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

 Annex: Climate framework laws around the world 
Country Title Year of last revision (year adopted) 
Andorra Law 21/2018, of 13 September, on the promotion of the energy transition and climate change1 2018 
Australia Climate Change Bill 2022 
Canada Net-Zero Emissions Accountability Act 2021 
Chile Framework Law on Climate Change 2022 
Colombia Law 2169/2021 promoting low -carbon development 2021 
Fiji Climate Change Act 2021 
Gabon Ordinance No. 019/2021 relating to climate change 2021 
Maldives Climate Emergency Act (Act no. 9/2021) 2021 
Mexico General Law on Climate Change 2022 (2012) 
New Zealand Climate Change Response (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act 2020 (2002) 
Nigeria Climate Change Act 2021 
South Korea Carbon Neutral Green Growth Framework Act to Tackle the Climate Crisis 2022 (2021) 
Taiwan Climate Change Response Act 2023 (2015) 
Additional laws without long -term emission reduction targets 
Argentina Law 27520 on Minimum Budgets for Adaptation and Mitigation to Global Climate Change 2019 
Albania Law no 155/2020 on climate change 2020 
Bahamas Climate Change and Carbon Market Initiatives Act 2022 
Mauritius Climate Change Act (no 11/2020) 2020 
Montenegro Law on Protection from the Negative Impacts of Climate Change 2019 
Nauru Environmental Management and Climate Change Act no 34/2020 2020 
Nepal Environment Protection Act 9/2019 (2076) 2019 
Philippines Climate Change Act (RA 9729) 2009 
Serbia Law on Climate Change 2021 
Uganda National Climate Change Act 2021 
Source: Data compiled the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment (2023): Climate Laws of the World Database 
Note: (1) Andorra’s law does not include an emission reduction target post -2030 but has multiple sectoral and emissions intensity targets for 2050. 
 The landscape of national climate framework laws in Europe - A status update 

Ecologic Institut e 
 
FB: /Ecologic.Institute 
Twitter: /EcologicBerlin