Innovations in blue 
and green ammonia 
productionAmmonia - 
fuel for net-zero

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
List of technical abbreviations
ATR Autothermal reforming
avg. Average
BAT Best available techniques
CCS Carbon capture and storage
CCUS Carbon capture, utilization and storage
CH 3OH Methanol
CH 4 Methane
CO 2 Carbon dioxide
CO 2e Carbon dioxide equivalent
HFO Heavy fuel oil
EJ Exajoule = 1018 joules
FS Flow switch
FSS Fuel supply system
FVT Fuel valve train
GHG Greenhouse gas
GJ Gigajoule = 109 joules
HC Hand controller
HP High pressure
LGI Liquid gas injection
LH 2 Liquid hydrogen
LNG Liquefied natural gas 
LPG Liquefied petroleum gas
LS Level switch
LT Level transmitter
MGO Marine gas oil
Mtpa Million metric tons per annum
NG Natural gas
N2O Nitrous oxide
NO x Nitrogen oxides
NH 3 Ammonia
PEM Proton exchange membrane
POX Partial oxidation
PV Photovoltaic
RWGS Reverse water-gas shift
SCR Selective catalytic reduction 
SMR Steam methane reformingList of standard abbreviations
approx. approximately
e.g. for example
et al. et alii (and others)
fig. figure
i.e. id est (that is)
p. page
tab. table

Synopsis
This white paper examines ammonia’s role in 
future energy solutions, emphasizing its potential 
as a carbon-free fuel and energy carrier. Currently 
central to the agricultural and industrial sectors, 
ammonia can revolutionize maritime transportation, 
power generation, and hydrogen storage due to 
its high energy density and zero-carbon emissions. 
The transition to ammonia involves significant 
technical and economic challenges, particularly 
in production and infrastructure adaptation.Author
Christian Rufer 
MAN Energy Solutions 
Schweiz AG,
Zurich, Switzerland
 
Head Business Intelligence 
and Business Development

Published in October 2024
To realize ammonia’s full potential 
as a green fuel and achieve net-zero 
emissions by 2050, concerted efforts 
are required. Stakeholders across the 
spectrum must commit to continued 
innovation, collaboration, and sustainable 
practices. By investing in research, 
upscaling renewable energy, building 
infrastructure, enhancing safety, 
promoting collaboration, implementing 
supportive policies, educating 
stakeholders, and fostering innovation, 
we can pave the way for a sustainable 
future where all renewable energy 
sources work together in harmony. There 
is urgency to this matter. The time to act 
is now - let us embrace the concept of 
ammonia as the green fuel of the future 
and work together to create a cleaner, 
more sustainable world. This paper aims to explore the current 
and future uses of of ammonia to 
identify challenges, propose solutions, 
encourage sustainable practices and 
promote innovation. We will analyze 
the historical and projected demand 
for ammonia, examine ammonia 
production methods, and highlight 
case studies and projects. Finally we 
will recommend strategies for future 
development.

Table of contents
Various uses of ammonia 6
Zero-carbon fuel with a bright future 8
Ramping up ammonia production 12
Big challenges and innovative solutions 16
Conclusion 19
Figures 21 
 
Tables 21 
 
Bibliography 22

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Various uses 
of ammonia 
From farming to fuels
Nitrogen fertilizers, including products 
like urea, ammonium nitrates, ammonium 
sulfate, ammonium phosphates, and 
nitrogen solutions, are essential for 
enhancing soil fertility and boosting crop 
yields. Various industrial applications, 
such as the production of explosives 
(ammonium nitrates), acrylic fibers and 
plastics (acrylonitrile), nylon (hexam -
ethylenediamine and caprolactam), 
polyurethanes (isocyanates), and a 
range of amines and nitriles, account 
for the remaining, mostly industrial, 
uses of ammonia. Ammonia’s future uses are expected 
to expand beyond its traditional role 
in agriculture and industry, driven by 
its potential as an energy carrier. Liquid 
ammonia has a relatively high energy 
intensity of 18.6 MJ / kg and can be used 
as a carbon-free fuel and energy storage 
medium. For example, newbuild or 
retrofit ammonia ship engines provide 
a viable pathway to decarbonize the 
maritime industry, a hard-to-abate Ammonia production has been a cornerstone of modern 
agriculture, supporting global food production by providing 
an essential component for nitrogen fertilizers, which 
account for nearly 70 % of the world’s ammonia market. 
sector responsible for about 3 % of 
global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. 
Furthermore, ammonia can be used as 
a hydrogen carrier, circumventing the 
need to liquefy hydrogen at cryogenic 
temperatures and maintain those 
temperatures for transportation and 
storage. Ammonia also has potential 
as a fuel for stationary power generation, 
where it can be co-fired with coal 
or used independently in dedicated 
ammonia-burning power plants.
Expected ammonia demand in mtpa
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050800

Fertilizer Industrial Maritime Hydrogen carrier Power generation
Fig. 2: Ammonia 
production with 
compressors and 
MAN DWE® reactorsFig. 1: Expected ammonia demand net-zero emission scenario 7
Historical demand and 
future expectations
In 2020, global ammonia demand 
was approximately 183 million metric 
tons (see IRENA & AEA 2022). Until 
now, ammonia production has primarily 
been driven by the necessity to provide 
fertilizers to increase agricultural 
yields, and in the future a significant 
part of the demand will remain tied 
to food production for a growing 
world population.
However, the use of ammonia as 
a carbon-neutral fuel for maritime 
transportation, power generation, 
and as a hydrogen carrier will exert 
extreme strains on the supply of 
ammonia, its price, and the allocation 
of its use. Fertilizer supply, and thus 
food production, should not be put 
at risk; therefore, careful policy 
measures and adequate construction 
of ammonia capacity are paramount to 
avoid fertilizer supply chain disruptions. 
Clearly, industry is supporting the 
emergence of ammonia as an energy 
carrier with over 290 mtpa of announced 
green and blue ammonia projects 
(see IRENA & AEA 2022; IEA 2023).
Difference between gray, blue, 
and green ammonia
Gray ammonia is produced using 
hydrogen derived from fossil fuels 
through traditional methods, where 
the excess carbon is released into 
the atmosphere. Blue ammonia refers 
to ammonia production where the 
excess carbon is captured and 
sequestered in secure geological 
formations. Finally, green ammonia 
describes ammonia produced with 
hydrogen generated by water 
electrolysis powered by renewable 
energy, making it carbon neutral.

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
As a zero-carbon fuel, ammonia produces no CO 2 emissions 
in combustion and thus addresses the urgent need to reduce 
GHG emissions in difficult-to-decarbonize sectors such as 
the maritime industry, power generation, and others. Its 
production can leverage renewable energy sources, thus 
ensuring a sustainable, decarbonized fuel supply.Zero-carbon fuel 
with a bright future
Use in power generation
Progress is being made in developing 
ammonia as a fuel for power generation 
as a supplemental fuel in coal power 
plants, for direct use in gas turbines 
and engines, or with decomposition 
prior to firing. The challenges of ammonia 
combustion in this area are similar 
to those for the maritime industry.MAN Energy Solutions is at the forefront 
of using ammonia as a fuel for power 
generation as a result of leveraging its 
combined experience in the development 
of two-stroke and four-stroke dual fuel 
engines with outputs of up to 26 MW, 
targeting industrial power generation 
and, in a later step, utilities.

Maritime transportation
Ammonia is recognized as a promising 
fuel for maritime transportation due 
to its overall favorable characteristics 
as a decarbonized fuel. Ammonia 
could account for up to 44 % of maritime 
fuel consumption by 2050, requiring 
the additional production of about 200 
million tons of renewable ammonia per 
year by 2050 (see Raucci et al. 2023).
Tab. 1: Properties of maritime fuelsPropertyAmmonia 
(NH 3 at -33 °C)Marine gas oil 
(MGO)Liquefied natural 
gas (LNG)Heavy fuel oil 
(HFO)Methanol 
(CH 3OH)Liquefied petroleum 
gas (LPG)Liquid hydrogen 
(LH 2)
Lower heating value MJ/kg 18.6 42.7 50 40.5 19.9 46 120
Energy Density MJ / m³ 12,700 35,700 21,200 36,500 14,900 26,700 8.5
Relative tank size, MGO = 100 % 280 % 100 % 170 % 97 % 240 % 130 % 420 %
Heat of vaporization kJ / kg 1,371 250 510 230 1,100 426 446
Autoignition temperature °C 651 250 - 300 537 250 - 400 470 450 500
Flame propagation speed cm/s 7.2 40 36 - 42 34 37- 43 46 265 - 325
CO 2 emissions kg CO 2 / GJ 0 74 55 77 68 63 0
NO x emissions Low (can be zero) High Low High Moderate Low Low
Typical uncombusted fuel Very low (NH 3 slip) 1- 2 % 0.1- 0.5 % 2 - 3 % 0.5 -1 % 0.5 -1 % Very lowAmmonia’s relatively high energy density 
compared to hydrogen makes it a more 
practical option for long-distance 
shipping, reducing the need for frequent 
refueling stops. Advanced combustion 
technologies and after-treatment 
systems can mitigate concerns over 
ammonia slip and nitrogen oxide (NO x) 
emissions, making it a cleaner 
Pros and cons of ammonia 
as a fuel in maritime transport 
The main strength of ammonia is that it 
is carbon-free: its combustion does not 
produce CO 2. Furthermore, its nitrous 
oxide (N 2O) content can be reduced in 
advanced catalytic reduction systems. 
Being a high-density fuel is critical 
for long-distance maritime transport. 
Another key advantage is that there 
is a mature ammonia industry: the 
handling of ammonia is known and 
proven, it is produced and transported globally. Leveraging the existing supply 
chains to upscale storage (bunkering) 
and distribution should be relatively 
simple and fast. 
On the other hand, ammonia is toxic at 
low concentrations and must be kept 
refrigerated or pressurized for storage. 
It is difficult to ignite, with slow flame 
propagation and high evaporation 
enthalpy. From an environmental standpoint, its combustion produces 
N2O, a GHG, and the production of 
green / blue ammonia is not entirely 
carbon-free across its entire supply 
chain. Large investments in renewable 
ammonia production are necessary 
to meet demand and scale up the 
technology. It will take time to reach 
cost parity between renewable ammonia 
and current fuels to drive growth.alternative to traditional fossil fuels. 
Furthermore, the existing global 
infrastructure for ammonia production 
and transport, primarily developed for 
agricultural use, can be adapted for 
maritime applications, facilitating a 
smoother transition (see DNV 2023; 
IRENA 2021).
MAN B&W 
engine 
 
From NH3
supply s ystem
Cooling waterNitrogen
supplyGas
safe
areaGas
safe
areaDry air inletVent air outlet
N2 vent
Heater/
coolerHP
pumpKnock-out
drum (engine)
Knock-out
drum (system)Ammonia catch
system
FVT
FSSRecirculation 
system
Fig. 4: Ammonia supply system block diagram with main componentsFig. 3: One-cylinder test setup with high pressure fuel oil 
and liquid ammonia injectors
1 Hydraulic oil
2 De-aeration point 
3 Fuel booster injection valve 
4 High pressure hydraulic oil pipes
5 Hydraulic accumulator
6 Hydraulic control valves 
7 Ammonia double-walled pipe inlet
8 Ammonia double-walled pipe outlet1

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Engine and fuel supply 
developments
The use of ammonia poses several 
challenges. First, ammonia is toxic 
and therefore more difficult to handle 
than other hydrocarbon fuels. Second, 
ammonia’s combustion characteristics 
are poor due to the high ignition energy 
required, slow burn rate, and high 
enthalpy of evaporation. Third, its 
emission characteristics are distinct 
from conventional engines, necessitating 
specific solutions to remove unburnt 
ammonia and nitrous oxides from the 
exhaust. Fourth, the engine must have 
dual fuel capabilities because the 
bunkering infrastructure for ammonia 
is currently nonexistent (see Raucci 
et al. 2023).
MAN Energy Solutions has addressed 
each of these challenges in a 
comprehensive development program. 
Successful ammonia combustion tests 
were conducted on a MAN Energy 
Solutions two-stroke engine at MAN’s 
Research Centre in Copenhagen in 
July 2023.

Based on proven technologies 
The ammonia fuel supply system (FSS) 
is based on the LPG system but includes 
additional features to address ammonia’s 
toxicity. Extensive safety measures were 
integrated into the engine test, including 
double-walled piping, ammonia sensors, 
system ventilation, and specialized water 
screens to contain any potential leaks.
The project also involved the 
development of advanced emission 
control technologies, using selective 
catalytic reduction (SCR) to manage 
NO x and N 2O emissions and ensure 
compliance with environmental 
regulations.
Tab. 2: Technical comparison between RWGS reactors and ammonia crackersHydrogen carrier for storage 
and transportation
The demand for hydrogen in industrial 
hubs is anticipated to increase and 
displace natural gas (NG) during the 
global energy transition. Green ammonia 
is a promising hydrogen carrier due to 
its high hydrogen content relative to its 
weight, simple liquefaction process, 
lack of need to return the carrier fluid, 
and the existing global infrastructure 
and international trade. To reduce the 
demand for hydrogen, many large and 
efficient industrial-scale ammonia 
cracking plants are in planning at the 
ports of destination, in particular in 
northern Europe and Japan.
Ammonia decomposition is not only 
an endothermic reaction but also 
requires energy to vaporize and heat 
the ammonia before it enters the reactor. 
Energy losses to the environment are 
substantial. Typically, ammonia provides 
this energy to the fired furnace, leading 
to a considerable loss of product. 
Therefore, the development of large-scale 
ammonia crackers employing renewable 
energy instead of ammonia is ongoing 
(see Trangwachirachai et al. 2024).Reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) 
reactors and ammonia cracking 
reactors share several similarities in 
terms of their operational principles, 
conditions, and catalytic requirements. 
Both technologies will find application 
in the quest for renewable energy, 
petrochemicals, and plastics.MAN Energy Solutions is investigating 
the benefits of using renewable electric 
energy instead of burning ammonia. The 
goal is to develop an ammonia cracker 
by leveraging the knowledge gained from 
RWGS reactors. An important feature 
will be the provision of the heat of 
reaction by molten salts heated with 
renewable electric power and introduced 
into the reactor with a heat exchanger. RWGS reactors Ammonia crackers
Operating temperature 500 - 550 °C 500 - 550 °C
Operating pressure 1 to 30 bar < 10 bar
Reaction type Endothermic Endothermic
Reactants CO₂, H₂ NH₃
Products CO, H₂O H₂, N₂
Phase Gas Phase Gas Phase
Applications CO₂ utilization, syngas production Hydrogen production, fuel cells, 
chemical synthesis
Products, if green 
hydrogen is usedGreen methanol, Fischer Tropsch Fuels, 
Dimethyl ether (DME), Oxo alcohols Green hydrogenThese tests provided promising 
data on combustion stability and 
pilot oil usage:
 -Pilot oil consumption is similar to that 
of other liquid gas injection (LGI) engines
 -NO x emissions are similar to, 
or slightly lower than, those 
of engines operating on MGO
 -Ammonia emissions are considerable 
and require removal by SCR
 -N2O emissions are very low Furthermore, Mitsui E&S and 
MAN Energy Solutions have partnered 
to develop, test, and commercialize 
a dual fuel ammonia engine targeted 
for delivery in 2024. The engine design 
is based on the MAN B&W ME-LGI 
engine design principle, ensuring 
safety through double-wall pipes with 
gas detection, a proven concept from 
existing dual fuel engines. A high 
pressure SCR system is employed to 
address NO x emissions, as traditional 
exhaust gas recirculation methods are 
ineffective for ammonia combustion.
Ammonia
reactor
Ammonia
condensor
NH 3 storageRecycle compressorSyngas feed compressor
Syngas feed:
3H 2 + 2N 2 ~30 bar 200 bar
500 °C400 °C
NH3 refrig. compressor
Fig. 5: Haber-Bosch process diagram12
MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Ramping up 
ammonia production
Present and future conditions
The current ammonia production of 
approximately 190 million metric tons 
per year accounts for about 8.6 EJ or 
2 % of the world’s total energy demand. 
Today, every ton of ammonia requires 
an average of 45 GJ and emits 2.4 tons 
of CO 2e. With the use of best available 
techniques (BAT), the energy intensity 
could be lowered to about 30 GJ per ton 
of ammonia and the carbon intensity 
reduced to 1.7 tons of CO 2e; with CCUS, 
the carbon intensity could be reduced 
to about 0.6 tons of CO 2e per ton of 
ammonia. Further improvements are expected by producing hydrogen 
through electrolysis and sourcing 
electric power from solar PV (0.6 tons) 
or wind power (0.2 tons of CO 2e per 
ton of ammonia). 
The Haber-Bosch process is at the 
core of all industrial ammonia synthesis 
processes. The synthesis of ammonia 
is the same regardless of the hydrogen 
source. High temperatures (400 - 650 °C) 
are needed to activate the reaction in 
the presence of a catalyst, and high The worldwide effort to decarbonize is driving 
demand for alternative fuels. As a CO 2-free fuel, 
ammonia is an attractive option for the chemical, 
maritime, and energy sectors. 
pressure (100 - 400 bar) is necessary 
for the reaction to occur at an 
economically viable speed for industrial 
production. The overall reaction is 
exothermic, thereby producing enough 
energy to power the process, although 
some electricity is required for motors 
and other equipment. Only a proportion 
of hydrogen is converted after cycling 
through the reactor, necessitating a 
large recycle flow of the unconverted 
hydrogen and nitrogen after the 
ammonia condenser.
Steam
Steam
methane
reformingSecondary
reformingShift reactor
Shift reactorSeparationMethanationAir compressor
400 - 500 °C
800 °C~35 bar
1,200 °C
1,000 °C
200 °CSyngas compressor
3H 2 + 2N 2 Natural gas
CCS compressor
CO 2CO 2
Fig. 6: Integrally geared air compressor
Fig. 7: SMR process diagram13
Steam methane reforming (SMR)
SMR is the primary method for producing 
hydrogen used in ammonia production. 
This process is well-established and 
widely adopted due to its efficiency and 
existing infrastructure. It involves the 
reaction of methane (CH₄), typically 
derived from NG, with steam (H 2O) to 
produce syngas, a mixture primarily 
of hydrogen (H 2) and carbon monoxide 
(CO). The overall process can be 
broken down into the following steps. 
 -Reforming 
In the presence of a catalyst, methane 
reacts with steam at high temperatures 
(700 -1,000 °C) to produce syngas: 
CH 4+H 2O→CO+3H 22. -Water-gas shift reaction 
The carbon monoxide in the 
syngas reacts in two stages 
(high temperature and low 
temperature) to maximize the 
conversion of CO into CO 2 
and H₂: CO+H 2O→CO 2+H 2. 
 -Secondary reforming 
The secondary reformers typically 
operate at 35 bar. The reforming air at 
this pressure level is most efficiently 
provided by an integrally geared 
compressor, for which MAN Energy 
Solutions has extensive experience in 
various processes. Air is introduced 
into the reformer where the oxygen in 
the air reacts with the methane, 
producing additional hydrogen while 
the nitrogen remains in the gas 
mixture, thus providing the required 
nitrogen for the Haber-Bosch 
process. Impurities from the air, such 
as argon and residual oxygen, must 
be removed in a subsequent step. -CO₂ removal 
The CO₂ produced in the shift 
reactions is removed using amine 
absorption and / or pressure swing 
absorption methods.
Fig. 8: Block diagram of ATR including air separation plant
Fig. 9: RIKT main air compressor and RG booster air compressor 
for a 1500 ton oxygen per day air separation plant
Air
compressorBooster air compressor
Main heat
exchangerHP column
Air separation unitAutothermal
reformer
HP columnReboilerPurification
Expansion
turbineSyngas
compressorNatural gasSteamOxygenNitrogen
~35 bar
CO 2CO 2Shift
reactor
Shift
reactor SeparationMethanation
200 °C3H 2 + 2N 2 
CCS compressor14
MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Autothermal reforming (ATR)
ATR is used in some ammonia plants 
(to a lesser extent than SMR). It is 
typically chosen for its thermal efficiency 
and flexibility with heavy hydrocarbon 
feedstocks, including coal or biomass. 
The overall process can be broken 
down into the following steps. 
 -Reforming and partial 
oxidation (POX) 
Combines the elements of SMR and 
POX in the same reactor, simplifies 
heat management, and leads to a 
more compact and integrated 
process design. 
 -Water-gas shift reaction 
Similar to SMR. 
 -Secondary reforming 
Not necessary. High purity nitrogen 
from the associated air separation 
plant is used. 
 -CO 2 removal 
Similar to SMR.Air separation plants are typically built 
with an isothermal main air compressor 
delivering air at about 5.5 bar to the 
cryogenic separation column. Part of this 
air is further compressed with a booster 
air compressor to a pressure sufficiently 
above the thermal pinch point in a heat 
exchanger. Here, the air is liquefied while 
the liquid oxygen is vaporized at the 
pressure needed by the primary 
reformer, typically around 35 bar.In conclusion, ATRs need less fuel and 
the conversion rate to hydrogen is higher 
than in an SMR, thereby reducing total 
CO 2 emissions. An additional investment 
in an air separation plant with motor- 
driven compressors is necessary to 
deliver the oxygen. The pure nitrogen 
produced provides a clean feedstock 
for ammonia synthesis and avoids 
the need for removal of impurities 
such as argon and other rare gases.
Fig. 11: Modularized 10 MW PEM electrolyzer with materials and energy balanceFig. 10: Compression services in green ammonia plantsDesalinationCompressor
ExpanderThermal 
energy 
storage
Purified water
Waste heatH2 feed 
compressorElectrolyzerSyngas feed 
compressorRecycle compressor
Ammonia
reactor
NH 3 refrig. 
compressor
Liquid NH 3Air
compressorNitrogen
 Air separation
Heat pump15
Hydrogen electrolysis
The carbon intensity of hydrogen 
production using SMR or ATR can be 
significantly reduced by capturing and 
sequestering carbon dioxide emissions. 
This is frequently denominated as blue 
hydrogen as opposed to green hydrogen. 
With the push towards producing 
renewable electricity via solar and wind, 
the emissions intensity of hydrogen can 
be lower than what is possible using 
carbon ca pture and storage. Electricity 
from most power grids still has high 
emission factors, therefore, abundant 
renewable power from wind, solar PV, 
hydropower, and nuclear power is 
necessary to produce ammonia with 
the lowest possible GHG emissions.
Alkaline electrolyzers produce hydrogen 
at near atmospheric pressure, far below 
the feedstock delivery pressure from 
SMRs or ATRs (30 to 35 bar). For this 
reason, the hydrogen feed compressors, 
nitrogen delivery pressure from the 
air separation plant, and syngas feed 
compressors must be optimally 
reconfigured to boost the hydrogen 
and nitrogen up to the syngas reactor 
pressure in the most efficient and 
cost-competitive manner. Here, MAN Energy Solutions has 
substantial experience in all 
compression services to determine 
the best configuration.
Electrolysis needs large amounts of 
purified water that can be provided by 
thermal desalination plants employing 
heat pumps that source the low 
temperature heat from the electrolyzers. 
In addition, large amounts of low- 
temperature heat from the electrolyzers 
provide an opportunity to stabilize 
intermittent renewable energy with 
thermal batteries, where MAN Energy 
Solutions is providing compressors 
for grid-scale energy storage. PEM electrolyzers deliver high-purity 
hydrogen at a pressure similar to 
SMRs, thereby reducing the need 
for configuration changes to the 
compression systems. In addition, 
PEM electrolyzers have quick response 
times and better integration with grids 
predominantly powered by renewable 
energy sources. MAN Energy Solutions' 
subsidiary, Quest One, focuses on 
producing hydrogen at higher delivery 
pressures, which reduces compression 
requirements for feeding hydrogen into 
pipeline networks and many industrial 
processes.

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Big challenges 
and innovative 
solutions
The ramp-up of low-emission ammonia production faces 
several challenges. These challenges can be categorized 
into technical, economic, regulatory, and infrastructure 
issues. MAN Energy Solutions can provide all the 
technologies necessary for large-scale production.
Production routeNatural gas 
SMRNatural gas 
ATRCoal 
gasificationSMR with 
CCS @ 95 %ATR with 
CCS @ 95 % Coal with CCS Electrolysis
Energy intensity (GJ per ton NH 3)
Feedstock 21 25.8 18.6 21 25.8 18.6 0
Fuel 11.1 2.1 15.1 11.1 2.1 15.1 0
Electricity 0.3 1 3.7 1 1.5 4.9 36
Steam -4.8 0 -1.3 -3.1 0 2.6 -1.6
Gross 32.4 28.9 37.4 33.1 29.4 38.6 36
Net 27.6 28.9 36.1 30 29.4 41.2 34.4
Direct CO 2
tons CO 2e per ton NH 3 1.8 1.5 3.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0
Indirect CO 2 emissions (tons CO 2e per ton NH 3)
Plant & maintenance 0.025 0.025 0.028 0.029 0.029 0.033 0.015
Feedstock and fuel 0.2 0.17 0.32 0.2 0.17 0.32 0
Total incl. electricity at world avg. 1.79 1.85 3.93 0.37 0.54 1.23 4.3
Total incl. electricity with wind 1.98 1.74 3.57 0.4 0.36 0.55 0.21
Tab. 3: Emission intensity of various ammonia production routes

Important steps in the 
energy transition 
Transitioning to renewable energy 
sources to power the Haber-Bosch 
process is challenging due to the 
intermittency and current costs of 
renewables. The intermittency of solar 
and wind power necessitates the 
development of reliable storage 
solutions for electric power to ensure 
a stable supply for the electrolyzers, 
as well as hydrogen storage to provide 
a constant feedstock flow to the 
ammonia synthesis plant. 
The initial capital expenditure for 
setting up green ammonia production 
plants, including renewable energy 
infrastructure, is considerable and 
poses a hurdle when compared 
to conventional or blue ammonia 
production. While renewable power 
generation has shown significant 
economies of scale, electrolyzers 
must follow suit to close the capital 
cost gap. 
Blue ammonia should not be produced 
for fuel use, since NG can be used 
more efficiently and at a lower cost by 
industrial users. Blue ammonia should 
target fertilizers and current industrial 
uses in an effort to curb the high 
emissions of conventional plants. Competing with conventional ammonia 
production, which is cheaper due to 
established infrastructure and lower costs 
of NG, presents a significant economic 
barrier. Effective regulatory and policy 
measures must be enacted and 
followed globally to address this issue. 
Finally, green ammonia is not the 
production route with the lowest 
GHG emissions if it is powered by 
grid electricity with an emissions 
factor above 200 g / KWh. Dedicated 
renewable power generation is 
necessary for green ammonia 
to fulfill its promise.

Conclusion
Achieving net-zero emissions requires collaboration 
across sectors. This is true for ammonia as well. 
Governments, industries, research institutions, and 
international organizations must work together to 
share knowledge, resources, and technologies. 
Upscaling renewable energy is 
essential. Renewables must provide 
a cost-competitive energy supply that 
will serve as the foundation for rapidly 
increasing the production of sustainable 
fuels and feedstocks. In the case of 
ammonia, the existing infrastructure 
must be extended with a focus on safety. 
Sharing knowledge and collaborating 
across sectors through partnerships 
and joint ventures multiplies the reach 
and speed of our progress towards a 
sustainable future.The worldwide effort to decarbonize 
is driving demand in the chemical, 
maritime, and energy sectors. As a 
CO 2-free fuel, ammonia is an attractive 
option as fuel and hydrogen carrier. 
MAN Energy Solutions can provide 
all the key technologies necessary 
for safe and cost-effective blue and 
green ammonia production. 

Tables
Tab. 1: Properties of maritime fuels (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024b)
Tab. 2: Technical comparison between RWGS reactors and ammonia crackers (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024c)
Tab. 3: Emission intensity of various ammonia production routes (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024h)Figures
Fig. 1: Expected ammonia demand net-zero emission scenario (see IRENA & AEA 2022)
Fig. 2: Ammonia production with compressors and MAN DWE® reactors (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024a)
Fig. 3: One-cylinder test setup with high pressure fuel oil and liquid ammonia injectors (see MAN Energy Solutions 2023a)
Fig. 4: Ammonia supply system block diagram with main components (see MAN Energy Solutions 2023b)
Fig. 5: Haber-Bosch process diagram (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024d)
Fig. 6: Integrally geared air compressor (see MAN Energy Solutions 2018)
Fig. 7: SMR process diagram (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024e)
Fig. 8: Block diagram of ATR including air separation plant (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024f)
Fig. 9: RIKT main air compressor and RG booster air compressor for a 1500 ton oxygen per day air separation plant 
(see MAN Energy Solutions 2011)
Fig. 10: Compression services in green ammonia plants (see MAN Energy Solutions 2024g)
Fig. 11: Modularized 10 MW PEM electrolyzer with materials and energy balance (see Quest One 2024)

MAN Energy Solutions
Ammonia - fuel for net-zero
Bibliography
Cetinkaya, E., Dincer, I., Naterer, G.F. (2012). Life cycle assessment of various hydrogen production methods. International Journal 
of Hydrogen Energy. Volume 37, Issue 3. Available from:  
DNV (2023). Energy Transition Outlook 2023. Maritime Forecast to 2050. Bærum, Norway: Det Norske Veritas. Available from: 
 
IEA (2021). Ammonia Technology Roadmap. Paris, France: International Energy Agency. Available from: 
windows.net/assets/6ee41bb9-8e81-4b64-8701-2acc064ff6e4/AmmoniaTechnologyRoadmap.pdf 
IEA (2023). Hydrogen Projects Database. Paris, France: International Energy Agency. Available from: 
data-and-statistics/data-product/hydrogen-production-and-infrastructure-projects-database
IRENA (2021). A pathway to decarbonise the shipping sector by 2050. Abu Dhabi, UAE: International Renewable Energy Agency. 
Available from:  
IRENA & AEA (2022). Innovation Outlook: Renewable Ammonia. Abu Dhabi, UAE: International Renewable Energy Agency; 
Brooklyn, USA: Ammonia Energy Association. Available from: 
Publication/2022/May/IRENA_Innovation_Outlook_Ammonia_2022.pdf 
IRENA & AEA (2022). Innovation Outlook: Renewable Ammonia. Abu Dhabi, Expected ammonia demand net-zero emission 
scenario
MAN Energy Solutions (2011): RIKT main air compressor and RG booster air compressor for a 1500 ton oxygen per day air 
separation plant. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2018): Integrally geared air compressor. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2020): MAN B&W two-stroke engine operating on ammonia. Copenhagen, Denmark: MAN Energy 
Solutions Germany. Available from: 
operating-on-ammonia-eng.pdf?sfvrsn=c4bb6fea_4 
MAN Energy Solutions (2023a): One-cylinder test setup with high pressure fuel oil and liquid ammonia injectors. 
Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2023b): Ammonia supply system block diagram with main components. 
Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024a): Ammonia production with compressors and MAN DWE® reactors. Augsburg: 
MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024b): Properties of maritime fuels. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024c): Technical comparison between RWGS reactors and ammonia crackers. 
Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE

MAN Energy Solutions (2024d): Haber-Bosch process diagram. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024e): SMR process diagram. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024f): Block diagram of ATR including air separation plant. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024g): Compression services in green ammonia plants. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
MAN Energy Solutions (2024h): Emission intensity of various ammonia production routes. Augsburg: MAN Energy Solutions SE
Morante, E. (2022). Roadmap to decarbonize the shipping sector: Technology development, consistent policies and investment in 
research, development and innovation. Geneva, Switzerland: UN Trade and Development. Available from: 
news/transport-newsletter-article-no-99-fourth-quarter-2022
Raucci, C., McKinlay, C. & Karan, A. (2023). The future of maritime fuels. What you need to know. London, UK: Lloyd’s Register 
Maritime Decarbonisation Hub. Available from: 
LR_Fuel_Mix_Report_v1.pdf 
Roman-White, S., Rai, S., Littlefield, J, Cooney, G., Skone, T. J. (2019). Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Perspective on Exporting 
Liquefied Natural Gas from the United States: 2019 Update. Pittsburgh, USA: National Energy Technology Laboratory. Available 
from:  
Trangwachirachai, K., Rouwenhorst, K., Lefferts, L., Faria Albanese, J.A. (2024). Recent Progress on Ammonia Cracking 
Technologies for Scalable Hydrogen Production. Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry. Volume 49. Available from: 
 
WEF (2023). Net-Zero Industry Tracker 2023. Ammonia industry net-zero tracker. Cologny, Switzerland: World Economic Forum. 
Available from:  
Zhao, P., Tamadon, A., Pons, D. (2022). Life cycle Assessment of Hydrogen Production via Natural Gas Steam Reforming vs. 
Biomass Gasification. Preprints. Available from:  
Quest One (2024): Modularized 10 MW PEM electrolyzer with materials and energy balance. Augsburg: Quest One
All data provided in this document is 
non-binding. This data is for information 
only and is not guaranteed in any way. 
Depending on the subsequent specific 
individual projects, the relevant data 
may be subject to changes and will be 
assessed and determined individually 
for each project. This will depend on 
the particular characteristics of each 
individual project, especially specific 
site and operational conditions. 
Copyright © MAN Energy SolutionsMAN Energy Solutions 
Schweiz AG
8005 Zurich, Switzerland
P + 41 44 287-2211