Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy
journal homepage: 
Germany’s Power-to-X policy for climate-neutral transport
Ali Ebadi Torkayesha,∗,Sandra Venghausa,b
aDecision Analysis and Socio-economic Assessment, School of Business and Economics, RWTH Aachen University, 52072 Aachen, Germany
bInstitute of Energy and Climate Research - Systems Analysis and Technology Evaluation (IEK-STE), Forschungszentrum Jülich,
Wilhelm-Johnen-Straße, 52428 Jülich, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Power-to-X
Policy analysis
Sustainable transport
Policy review
GermanyA B S T R A C T
Germany, aligned with the European Union, has set important targets for decreasing greenhouse gas emissions
by 65% by 2030 and achieving climate neutrality by 2045. In this context, Power-to-X fuels have emerged
as promising solutions for defossilizing transport modes less suitable for electrification. However, a significant
challenge in developing Power-to-X fuels is the lack of a well-defined regulatory framework for their production
and utilization. Thus, this study investigates the regulatory landscapes of the EU and Germany, aiming to
comprehend objectives, support schemes, and advancements. A total of 25 legal frameworks from the EU and
Germany with direct or indirect effects on Power-to-X fuels were identified. For a detailed and comprehensive
policy analysis, a qualitative inductive approach based on a coding scheme and policy content analysis, was
implemented. Findings indicate that several updates in the German and EU regulatory frameworks addressed
Power-to-X fuels in the 2010s and 2020s. The RED III, the REFuelEU Aviation and the FuelEU Maritime have
shown to be turning points for Power-to-X fuels in the EU. In Germany, the most relevant policies are the 37.
BImSchV, the National Hydrogen Strategy, and the PtL Roadmap. Key challenges are identified related to the
limited coherence among policies supporting the sustainable use of resources for the fuel production.
1. Introduction
Climate change is one of the most critical challenges of our time [1,
2]. Fossil fuels and their derivatives continue to be the main drivers
of climate change [3,4]. Shifting to renewable energies stands as the
primary strategy in the European Union (EU) for reducing greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions [5,6]. To address climate change and reduce GHG
emissions, there has been a significant growth in policies concerning
renewable energy technologies at the EU level. The EU intensified its
regulatory measures with the introduction of the EU Green Deal in
2020 [7] and the Fit for 55 package in 2021 [8]. Both policy packages
aim to reduce GHG emissions, by 55% by 2030 and achieve the status
of climate neutrality by 2050.
Under the existing regulatory frameworks, the European Environ-
ment Agency (EEA) reported a reduction in total GHG emissions within
the EU-27 from approximately 4.65 million kt ofCO2equivalent in
1990 to almost 3.24 million kt ofCO2equivalent in 2021 [9]. During
this period, most sectors, such as industry, agriculture, and the building
sector, have made progress in reducing their GHG emissions. However,
efforts to reduce GHG emissions in the EU’s transport sector have not
led to significant reduction over the last three decades [9]. Domestic
transport, which emitted 672.476 million tons ofCO2equivalent in
1990, experienced a 16.3% increase in its GHG emissions by 2021,
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address:  (A.E. Torkayesh) .accounting for over one-fifth of the total EU emissions [9]. International
aviation and shipping follow the same trend, with emissions rising sig-
nificantly: international aviation increased from 54,632 to 109,723 kt
ofCO2equivalent (over 100% increase) (1990 to 2022), while shipping
emissions increased from 102,176 to 130,645 kt ofCO2equivalent (a
27.86% increase) for the same period [9].
In the EU and globally, Germany has often been recognized as a
pioneer in climate and sustainability endeavors. This acknowledgment
stems from its ambitious climate policies and its advanced renewable
energy technologies. Unlike the increase in GHG emissions in the EU’s
transport, Germany has been able to slightly decrease its emissions from
163 million tons ofCO2equivalent in 1990 to 148 million tons ofCO2
equivalent in 2022, accounting for roughly one-fifth of the total emis-
sions [10]. Despite this reduction in the transport sector, Germany still
faces clear challenges in meeting the climate targets set by the EU Green
Deal and Fit for 55. Most recently, the German government intensified
the country’s climate policies by updating the Climate Action Plan,
establishing even more ambitious goals for reducing GHG emissions
by 65% by 2030 and achieving GHG neutrality by 2045. Within the
current regulatory frameworks with challenges posed by the dominance
of lobbies for fossil fuels in the energy market in the German transport

Received 18 June 2024; Received in revised form 25 November 2024; Accepted 26 November 2024Energy 313 (2024) 134020 
Available online 2 December 2024 
0360-5442/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (  
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
sector, and along with growing transport demand, there is a significant
risk of failing to meet these targets.
The shift from fossil fuels to renewable sources is a key precondi-
tion for success in meeting the climate targets in transport [11-13].
Electrification is considered the most effective strategy for meeting
the GHG emission reduction targets for the transport sector [14-16].
While the German government maintains its focus on electrification, it
is important to note that certain transport modes pose challenges for
electrification given their specific technical characteristics. For these
transport modes, Power-to-X (PtX) fuels have emerged as promising
solutions, notably in maritime and aviation, requiring minimal engine
modifications [17,18]. Nevertheless, achieving maximum capacities in
utilizing PtX fuels necessitates the development of new infrastructure,
onboard fuel storage, and suitable propulsion systems. In this regard,
the broader acceptance and usage of PtX fuels faces obstacles stemming
from the dominance of lobbies for fossil fuels in the energy market,
limited regulatory support, insufficient electrolysis capacity in the EU,
and their high costs [19-21]. As a consequence, although there is signif-
icant market demand for alternatives to fossil fuels, the expectation for
these alternatives to be priced similarly to fossil fuels poses challenges
to further investments in PtX fuels.
The current literature has addressed strategic questions regarding
the utilization of PtX fuels in the transport sector. An important study in
this field was conducted by Chehade et al. [22], who presented a review
of global PtX projects. Their research revealed a total of 192 projects
distributed across 32 countries. Among these projects, 154 were located
in Europe, 18 in North America, 13 in Asia, five in Oceania, and two in
South America. Notably, hydrogen-to-power and hydrogen-to-fuel were
the primary products in 59% of these projects. For Europe, a compre-
hensive overview of PtX demonstration projects was provided by Wulf
et al. [23], in which the historical development of PtX projects was
part of the main discussion. Findings highlight various developments
of PtX projects in Germany, dating back to 2003, as one of the first
pioneers in the field. Similarly, several studies have been conducted
to investigate a PtX economy in different countries, including Den-
mark [24], the United Kingdom [25], Italy [26], South Korea [27], and
Germany [28,29]. Considering the various challenges and processes
that accompany PtX projects, several studies have been conducted ad-
dressing regulatory frameworks [19,30,31], power-to-gas (PtG) [32,33]
and power-to-liquid (PtL) [34,35], or energy modeling [36,37].
The successful production, adoption, and market diffusion of PtX
fuels necessitate strong policy support within a robust regulatory frame-
work to ensure a sustained supply based on the defined quotas and
targets [38-41]. While numerous studies explore various challenges
associated with PtX projects, there remains a scarcity in the literature
specifically addressing regulatory and market challenges in Germany.
A key question is whether PtX fuels are the best alternatives to be used
in aviation and maritime from a sustainability perspective. To answer
this question, a policy analysis of PtX fuels is essential to investigate
whether policies effectively support their large-scale deployments and
market integration, to identify and address barriers, to detect sus-
tainability (economic, environmental, and social) challenges, and to
enhance national, continental, and international competitiveness and
cooperation. Thus, exploring the regulatory frameworks and legislation
governing PtX fuels in Germany and the EU is crucial for considering
their transformative potential in achieving GHG neutrality.
Although previous studies have examined PtX fuels and technolo-
gies in the EU and Germany [19,20], none have addressed the regu-
latory and legal aspects in Germany. Therefore, this study scrutinizes
both national and EU policies, using a qualitative inductive approach
through a coding scheme and a policy content analysis (policy review).
This study primarily draws on policy documents, the official web-
sites of ministries, the EU, and reports from well-known governmental
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as key data sources. The
main objectives of the study can be summarized as (I) identifying
national and EU policies that directly or indirectly affect PtX fuels;(II) identifying support schemes and instruments within the selected
policies; (III) conducting a thematic analysis of the policies to detect the
relations between PtX fuels and relevant components in a cross-sectoral
framework; (IV) presenting an overview of the current status of PtX
projects in Germany and the EU in order to understand the progress of
existing policies; (V) evaluating the significance of European and global
partnerships to improve value chain of PtX fuels; (VI) highlighting the
necessity for enhancing a focused and reliable regulatory framework
favoring PtX fuels; and (VI) deriving insights to propose recommen-
dations based on policy implications to accelerate the transition. In
accordance with the defined objectives, this study aims to address the
following research questions:
•Which policy areas influence the development of PtX fuels in
Germany?
•Which specific laws, regulations, directives, initiatives and strate-
gies govern the production and use of PtX fuels in Germany?
•What are the main quantitative and qualitative policy targets
regulating PtX fuels?
•Which policy implications can be drawn for designing future
roadmaps aimed at the sustainable transition of Germany’s trans-
port sector using PtX fuels?
In order to do so, a policy analysis approach was pursued as outlined
in Section 2. The main legal frameworks in the EU and Germany as
well as corresponding support schemes are presented in Section 3.
Current developments in Germany are reviewed in Section 4. Policy
implications for the regulatory frameworks supporting PtX fuels in the
German transport sector are discussed in Section 5. Concluding remarks
and future directions are presented in Section 6.
2. Methodology: A qualitative policy analysis
To examine the PtX policy landscape in Germany and the EU, a
qualitative inductive approach based on a coding scheme and a content
analysis was used for this study. A qualitative inductive approach
enables the systematic analysis of policy documents and reports from
ministries, governmental organizations, and NGOs to derive meaning-
ful insights, themes and patterns with respect to policy objectives,
measures, and trends [42-44].
A crucial first step in this regard is to understand the production
pathways of PtX fuels, required resources for these production path-
ways, and common terminology. As PtX fuels emerge as renewable fuel
alternatives, various definitions have been proposed for them, often
leading to confusion with other sustainable fuels [20,45,51,52]. The
distinction is important considering their production processes, feed-
stocks, and environmental impacts. Misunderstandings in terminology
can lead to policy and market confusion, thus making it mandatory
to clearly define and differentiate PtX fuels from other renewable
and sustainable alternatives. In this context, Table 1summarizes the
descriptions of the main terminologies in order to establish the required
fundamental background for the policy review and analysis. Similarly,
Fig. A.1illustrates a schematic overview of the value chain of PtX fuels.
2.1. Data collection
In a qualitative content-driven approach, selecting the proper policy
documents is a crucial step that significantly impacts outcomes. Given
the complexity of PtX fuels and the transport sector, along with their
numerous interdependencies with other sectors, establishing clear and
relevant selection criteria for including policies is essential for ensuring
a thorough and meaningful analysis.
An initial goal was to identify the policy areas most relevant to
driving PtX fuels within the transport sector. The official websites of
German ministries and the Council of the EU were used as key sources
for understanding the current landscape of PtX-related policies and
identifying potential policy areas relevant to the defossilization of theEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table 1
Relevant definitions for PtX terminology.
Term Description References
PtX fuels PtX refers to pathways that use electricity, preferably renewable electricity, to produce hydrogen
(green hydrogen) using electrolysis.
It synthesizes hydrogen with carbon from biogenic or non-biogenic sources. These sources include
industry-based carbon and direct air capture (DAC). The process is performed by means of
Fischer-Tropsch (FT) or methanol synthesis.
[19,20,38,45-50]Sustainable fuels Sustainable fuels refer to energy sources derived from renewable resources that minimize
environmental impact and GHG emissions.
Alternative fuels Alternative fuels are sustainable fuels that include PtX fuels as well as biofuels, CNG and LNG.
Synthetic fuels Synthetic fuels are sustainable fuels produced by converting biomass, gas, coal or waste into different
fuels substituting diesel, petrol or jet fuel.
PBtX Power-Biomass-to-X (PBtX) fuels, also known as e-biofuels, are produced jointly by utilizing green
hydrogen from renewable electricity with bio-based feedstock.
PtL PtL refers to PtX fuels in liquid form, which are specifically used in the transport and industry
sectors, with end products such as e-kerosene.
PtG PtG is the gaseous form of PtX fuels, which are usually available in the form of hydrogen and
methane.
PtC PtC refers to a process of converting renewable electrical energy into chemical products through
electrolysis and subsequent chemical synthesis.
FT synthesis FT synthesis is a chemical process used to convert synthesis gas (syngas), a mixture ofCOandH2,
into liquid hydrocarbons, such as PtX fuels.
Methanol synthesis Methanol synthesis involves converting renewable hydrogen and carbon into methanol through a
catalytic process. A mixture of hydrogen andCO, known as syngas, is produced. In the catalytic
reactor, syngas is transformed into methanol.
RFNBO Renewable fuels of non-biological origin (RFNBO) refer to fuels in gaseous or liquid forms that are
produced from electricity. They are produced by the synthesis using biogenic carbon or DAC and
hydrogen. On the other hand, renewable fuels of biological origin are generally referred to biofuels.
Green ammonia Green ammonia or e-ammonia refers to a fuel that is produced using green hydrogen through the
Haber-Bosch process.
Haber-Bosch synthesis The Haber-Bosch process is a means for synthesizing ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen. It
involves a high-pressure, high-temperature catalytic reaction, enabling the production of ammonia on
an industrial scale.
E-methane E-methane, or electro-methane, is a synthetic methane produced through the conversion of renewable
electricity, e.g., wind or solar, into hydrogen via electrolysis, which is then combined with CO2in a
process called methanation.
E-methanol E-methanol, or electro-methanol, is a synthetic alcohol produced by combining renewable hydrogen
with CO2through chemical reaction.
transport sector using renewable fuels. The focus was placed on the
EU Green Deal and the Fit for 55 packages, the two primary legal
frameworks addressing climate change in the EU. The concerns outlined
in the EU Green Deal and the Fit for 55 packages regarding emissions
in the transport sector underscore the importance of policies in the
energy, fiscal, agriculture, and infrastructure sectors for the adoption
and diffusion of PtX fuels. As a result, the selection framework not
only focuses on transport policies but also includes policies from these
key areas-namely energy and fuel, climate change and environment,
agriculture and land-use as well as infrastructural and physical systems.
A structured search framework was developed and implemented
to identify and select relevant policies. Policies across the identified
areas were systematically collected and underwent a thorough content
analysis. This rigorous review ensured that each policy was analyzed
with regard to either its direct or indirect influence on the development
and progress of the transport sector. As with the initial search for policy
fields, the official websites of German ministries and the EU Council
were used as the primary sources for selecting policy documents.
For German policies, all relevant documents were gathered through
ministry databases. For EU policies, the official website of the European
Commission was utilized for document collection. This process involved
an in-depth examination of policies within each sector, with a focus on
identifying those that demonstrate logical relevance and connectivity
to PtX fuels. Following the procedure, a total of 25 policies were
identified, including laws, regulations, directives, stakeholder-based
processes, initiatives, and proposals (Table A.1). For further analysis ofindustrial projects and current developments in Germany and the EU,
the search procedure was correspondingly adopted by using the offi-
cial websites of the key industrial organizations. Moreover, hydrogen
strategies in different federal states were identified and considered for
a regional analysis in order to explore policy trends and targets. Other
sources used in this study relate to open-access data from governmental
organizations, NGOs, and research institutes.
2.2. Policy analysis framework
To systematically examine policies within a multi-sector, multi-
perspective system, using a thorough content analysis framework is
essential. This framework acts as a key tool for evaluating policies,
with the main goal of identifying interconnections that can support PtX
fuels. Using this approach, the analysis can uncover interrelationships
and synergies across sustainable fuel alternatives, measuring synergies
between support schemes and PtX fuels, and helping to develop a more
coherent and effective policy landscape for these fuels.
For this purpose, we utilize a well-established data analysis ap-
proach that involves developing and assigning codes to text within the
identified policy documents [53]. This method enables the identifica-
tion and comparison of key features and findings in scientific research
through a combination of qualitative and quantitative techniques. In
our case, the research questions outlined in Section 1are translated
into the coding procedure. The objectives for reviewing the collected
policies using a coding scheme can be divided into understandingEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 1.A flowchart of the applied approach.
Table 2
The coding scheme developed for the policy analysis.
Terminology Resources & technologies Indirect challenges Market development
PtX, PtL, PtG, E-fuels, electrofuels,
electricity-based fuels, RFNBOs,
carbon-based fuels, synthetic fuels,
alternative fuels, sustainable aviation
fuels, ammonia, e-ammonia, sustainable
fuels, sustainable marine fuels,
e-methane, e-methanolWater, carbon (DAC, biogenic, industry,
point source, bio-based), solar power,
wind power, renewable electricity,
hydrogen, green hydrogen, electrolysis,
Haber-Bosch, FT synthesis, methanol
synthesisLand-use, agriculture,
bio-based feedstock,
climateIncentives, subsidies, tax
programs, innovation, R&D
the terminology, interconnections with other terminologies for sustain-
able fuel alternatives, the role of different resources and technologies,
market instruments e.g., incentives, subsidies, and taxes, as well as
innovation and R&D support. To operationalize these questions for the
content analysis, MAXQDA software was used.
MAXQDA is a software designed for qualitative and mixed-methods
research, facilitating systematic organization, analysis, and visualiza-
tion of diverse data types, including policy documents. In the field
of policy analysis, the software is used to code segments of text in
order to systematically categorize themes for rigorous analysis, such
as network mapping and frequency analysis. In our case, within the
software, suitable codes were established for the policy review and
analysis. Using the defined codes inTable 2, a frequency analysis
would be conducted to facilitate network mapping of the identified
codes, based on their occurrence frequency across similar policy docu-
ments.
Fig. 1provides a summary of the methodology employed in this
study, including the coding scheme derived for the policy analysis.3. Policies in the EU and Germany
3.1. The policy framework in the EU
The regulatory framework governing PtX fuels in the EU consists
of a complex set of policies, directives, initiatives, and proposals.
According to the qualitative policy analysis approach, introduced in the
previous section, the EU databases, including the European Commission
directory for the EU Green Deal and Fit for 55 packages, along with
the European Hydrogen Observatory (EHO), were identified as the
main sources for the PtX-relevant policies. In this context, policies were
scrutinized on the basis of the terminology defined in the previous
section. In this way, 18 policies exerting direct or indirect effects on
PtX fuels were identified for the EU (Table 3).
To provide an overview of the policies directly and significantly
affecting PtX fuels at the EU level, Table 4presents a summary of the
corresponding support schemes. Further in-depth content analysis of
the identified policies is presented below.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table 3
Identified EU policy areas and sub-policies.
Emission & Fuel Renewable energy Hydrogen Resource utilization
EU Emission Trading System (ETS),
Energy Taxation Directive (ETD), Energy
Efficiency Directive (EED), Effort Sharing
Regulation (ESR), Carbon Border
Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM)Renewable Energy Directive III (RED
III), ReFuelEU Aviation, FuelEU
Maritime, REPowerEUEU Hydrogen Strategy,
Hydrogen Bank, Hydrogen
and Decarbonized Gas
Market PackageNet Zero Industry Act
under Green Deal
Industrial Plan
Fiscal Transport Agriculture & Land-use Infrastructure
Social Climate Fund (SCF) Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy
(SSMS)EU Common Agriculture
Policy (CAP), LULUCFAlternative Fuels
Infrastructure Directive
(AFIR)
In the early 2010s, PtX fuels only received indirect support through
EU policies such as the AFIR in 2014. This directive incentivized EU
member states to develop national policies to address challenges related
to the refueling and recharging of vehicles and vessels powered by
alternative fuels. Notably, the AFIR refers to various PtX fuels such
as synthetic jet fuel, synthetic paraffinic diesel, hydrogen, and FT
diesel under the category of ‘‘alternative fuels’’ [54]. Recognizing the
significance of the AFIR in supporting alternative fuels, a proposal
for its revision was put forth under the Fit for 55 package. The aim
was to align with the latest climate targets in the EU and enhance
collaboration among member states to strengthen their infrastructures
for alternative fuels [55].
In 2018, the RED II was the first EU policy to consider RFNBOs for
defossilizing the EU transport sector [56]. Increasing its previous 20%
target for 2020 [57] to 32% for 2030 was one of the main reasons for
the emergence of PtX fuels as potential pathways to achieving this goal.
Given the ongoing discussions about accelerating efforts to combat
climate challenges, the RED III was introduced as part of the Fit for 55
package in 2021. The RED III increased the previous target to an even
more ambitious target, namely a minimum share of 42.5% renewables
by 2030. In this regard, the RED III specifies a 29% share of renewables
in the transport sector, paying close attention to advanced biofuels and
RFNBOs (+5.5% share) with at least a 1% share of RFNBOs in the form
of hydrogen [58]. Next to the RED III and the AFIR, the Fit for 55
introduced the ReFuelEU Aviation and FuelEU Maritime [59,60]. Both
policies emphasize the significant contributions of the aviation and
maritime sectors to the EU’s transport emissions, accounting for approx-
imately 28%. They focus in particular on renewable fuels, specifically
jet e-fuels (e-kerosene produced through PtL) and sustainable marine
fuels. The ReFuelEU Aviation set specific quotas for the share of SAFs
as well as PtL fuels by 2050. Similarly, the FuelEU Maritime focused
on setting strict carbon intensity reductions by 2050.
Among policies addressing emission reduction and fuel develop-
ment, the EU ETS is one of the most important policies affecting
PtX fuels. The revision of the EU ETS within the Fit for 55 package
addresses PtX fuels with terms such as RFNBOs, carbon-based fuels,
alternative fuels, hydrogen and ammonia [65]. The revised ETS pri-
oritizes binding targets for reducing GHG emissions across all sectors,
with a heightened emphasis on the transport sector. Among the various
sustainable alternatives, PtX fuels, RFNBOs and hydrogen, are subject
to strict regulation within the ETS framework. Moreover, the revised
ETS now encompasses all hydrogen production pathways exceeding
five tons per day, including electrolyzers, making renewable and low-
carbon hydrogen facilities eligible for free allowances. The support for
using hydrogen and other RFNBOs is supposed to be increased in the
future within the maritime and aviation sectors via new certification
standards. Conversely, the ETD is a key policy at the intersection of
emission reduction and fiscal measures. It proposes a zero-tax rate
on SAFs during a ten-year introductory phase. This initiative will
significantly contribute to achieving price parity for PtX fuels in the
aviation sector [66].
Another crucial policy in this area is the CBAM, which plays a
significant role for non-EU producers where the ETS does not apply.Hydrogen, as one of the key components for PtX fuels, is one of the pri-
mary products that the CBAM seeks to regulate by granting certificates
based on low-emission production processes. As a result, it indirectly
incentivizes non-EU countries to invest in cleaner technologies and
sustainable practices for producing PtX fuels, which will ultimately help
to meet EU demand [67].
Recognizing the critical role of hydrogen in the development of
PtX fuels, the EU Hydrogen Strategy emphasizes its significance as a
cornerstone of the Union’s sustainable energy transition, which was
introduced under the EU Green Deal [61]. The EU Hydrogen Strategy
proposes 20 key actions in four categories: increasing investments
in hydrogen projects, boosting demand and scaling up production,
enabling physical and regulatory frameworks, and enhancing interna-
tional collaborations. The primary quantitative targets of the strategy
entail a minimum of 40 GW of renewable hydrogen electrolyzers and
an increase in production capacity to 10 million tons of renewable
hydrogen in the EU by 2030 [19,61]. While the hydrogen strategy
does not explicitly employ the term ‘‘PtX’’, it broadly covers sustainable
renewable and low-carbon fuels, including hydrogen-based synthetic
fuels such as ammonia and e-kerosene. Based on the role of hydrogen
for synthetic and e-fuels, the strategy establishes robust coherence to
the AFIR, ReFuelEU Aviation, and FuelEU Maritime. In order support
the EU strategy, several countries have adopted national strategies
that codify specific measures for hydrogen value chains. According
to the European Hydrogen Observatory, as of 2024, countries with
published hydrogen strategies include Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croa-
tia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Hungary, Ireland, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, and the United Kingdom. In contrast,
the countries without strategies are Cyprus, Greece, Iceland, Latvia,

Switzerland.
Following the growing focus on a hydrogen economy in the EU,
in December 2022, a political agreement was reached regarding the
revision of the ETS. This agreement established free allowances for
electrolyzers producing hydrogen, increased the number of allowances
allocated to the Innovation Fund, and enabled EU-wide auctions to
be conducted under the Innovation Fund [68]. Through legislative
developments, European industry is rapidly building a robust pipeline
of hydrogen projects. The European Clean Hydrogen Alliance has iden-
tified numerous projects across the entire value chain. Sixteen EU
member states have adopted national hydrogen strategies, targeting
a minimum electrolyzer capacity of 40 GW by 2030, translating into
5.6 million tons of renewable hydrogen. Moreover, Europe is a global
leader in electrolyzer manufacturing, with a joint declaration to scale
up production capacity showcasing EU industry’s readiness to deliver.
These competitive advantages, combined with the early establishment
of regulatory frameworks, have attracted numerous hydrogen project
developers to invest in the region.
Currently, Europe accounts for over 30% of proposed hydrogen
investments worldwide. Thus, in order to facilitate investment and
financial incetives, in 2022, the EU established the Hydrogen Bank
with two new financing mechanisms to support renewable hydrogenEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table 4
A summary of support schemes within the EU policies on PtX fuels.
Policy Targets & Support Schemes References
RED III - A minimum share of 42.5% of renewables in total energy consumption.
- An additional 2.5% top-up share of renewables.
- A minimum share of 29% of renewables in the transport sector.
- A minimum share of 5.5% of RFNBOs and advanced biofuels.
- A minimum of a 1% increase in the share of RFNBOs by 2030.
- A minimum indicative share of 1.2% of RFNBOs in maritime transport.
- Significant support for the supply of renewable electricity for RFNBOs, and hydrogen market ramp-up.
- A minimum of 42% of hydrogen use should be from RFNBOs.[58]
AFIR - Ensuring required infrastructures for PtX fuels with final products in the form of hydrogen including
refueling.
- Improving monetary aspects such as payment methods, price transparency, and availability of stations.
- Providing required infrastructures to supply renewable electricity at ports and airports.[55]
ReFuelEU Aviation - Ensuring a minimum SAF share of 2% of SAFs by 2025, 6% by 2030, 20% by 2035, 34% by 2040, 42%
by 2045, and 70% by 2050.
- A minimum RFNBOs (PtL-based e-kerosene) share of 1.2% by 2030, 5% by 2035, 10% by 2040, 15% by
2045, and 35% by 2050 of the SAF.
- Providing required infrastructure for SAF in the EU airports.[60]
FuelEU Maritime - Ensuring a minimum share of 6%-9% in 2030 and 86%-88% by 2050 of renewable and low-carbon fuels
in maritime transport.
- A minimum share of 2% of RFNBOs apply as of 2034 if RFNBOs’ share remains less than 1% by 2031.
- Providing necessary infrastructures for refueling in ports.[59]
EU Hydrogen Strategy - Developing an investment agenda to support green hydrogen production.
- A minimum hydrogen production capacity of 6 GW and 40 GW by 2024 and 2030.
- A minimum of 10 million tons of domestic green hydrogen production.
- Supporting the use of green hydrogen in the transport sector.
- Presenting demand-side policies for green hydrogen utilization according to the RED III and AFIR.
- Enhancing cooperation for green hydrogen production and utilization.[61]
Sustainable and Smart
Mobility Strategy (SSMS)- Ensuring zero-emission vessels by 2030.
- Ensuring zero-emission aircraft by 2035.
- Supporting the RED III by supplying renewable and low-carbon fuels.
- Supporting ReFuelEU and FuelEU initiatives to defossilize aviation and maritime transport.
- Enhancing fuel efficiency for aviation and maritime transport.
- Supporting AFIR by ensuring the development of required infrastructures.
- Putting an end to fossil fuels subsidies.
- Making zero-emission ocean-going vessels and large zero-emission aircraft market ready by 2030 and 2035,
respectively.
- Increasing share of transport by inland waterways and short sea shipping.[62]
Hydrogen and
Decarbonized
Gas Market Package- Proposing revisions on the regulation on natural gas transmission networks, the Directive on common rules
for the internal market on natural gas, and gas security of supply regulation.
- Enabling a higher proportion of renewable and low-carbon gases in the energy system, to reduce reliance
on fossil natural gas.
- Setting the stage for market participants, facilitating the development of a Europe-wide market for
renewable and low-carbon gases thorough a certification scheme.
- Facilitating the integration and accessibility of renewable and low-carbon gases into the current gas grid.
- Promoting coordinated network planning across electricity, gas, and hydrogen infrastructure.
- Establishing the European Network of Network Operators for Hydrogen, to facilitate the development of
hydrogen infrastructure.[63]
Net Zero Industry Act - Creating an environment conducive to expanding the production capacity of net-zero technologies for
ensuring a secure supply of net-zero technologies to enhance the resilience of the EU’s energy system.
- Enhancing investment certainty, policy alignment, and coordination by establishing monitoring mechanisms.
- Facilitating and enabling carbon capture and storage projects, including improving the accessibility of
carbon storage sites.
- Leveraging the strength of the single market through promoting investments in various technologies such as
renewable energy, electricity and heat storage, heat pumps, grid infrastructure, RFNBOs, electrolyzers, fuel
cells, advanced fuels onshore and offshore renewable technologies, and sustainable biogas and biomethane.[64]
EU ETS - Extending the ETS to cover maritime applications and providing new ETS for road transport.
- Regulating European aviation allowances, allocating certificates, and auctioning.
- From 2024 to 2026, the allocation of free certificates under the ETS is set to significantly decrease.
- Ensuring a just green transition in all sectors, including transport, through the SCF.[65]
production both within the EU and internationally [68]. The Bank
primarily works on four key areas: creating a domestic market, im-
porting to the EU, improving transparency, and coordination in the
hydrogen supply chain, and uses existing European and international
financial instruments to facilitate previous actions [68]. In order to
support the development of a strong hydrogen economy in the EU,
the hydrogen and gas decarbonization package was adopted in 2024,
focusing specifically on infrastructure improvements [63].
Consequently, two key policies-namely the CAP and the LULUCF-
serve as regulatory frameworks with indirect effects on PtX fuels. These
policies address key challenges such as land use, sustainable biomasssourcing, and carbon sequestration [69,70]. Another relevant policy is
the Net-Zero Industry Act, which aims to enhance the manufacturing
of clean energy technologies in the EU. This act focuses on scaling up
the production of several clean energies, including electrolyzers, carbon
capture and storage, and renewable power generation [64].
3.2. The policy framework in Germany
Germany’s recognition of PtX fuels as one of potential contributions
to the energy transition, known as ‘‘Energiewende’’, dates back toEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
the early 2000s. However, the initial official discussions concerning
PtX fuels in political debates emerged with the introduction of the
stakeholder-based consultation process entitled ‘‘Mobility and Fuels
Strategy’’ (MFS) in 2013 [71]. The MFS addresses a broad range of fuels
such as hydrogen, biomass-to-liquid, SNG, alternative fuels, renewable
fuels, and implicitly discusses PtX fuels by electricity-to-kerosene, and
PtG. In order to support alternative fuels and electrification in road
transport, the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure
launched the 2030 Federal Transport Infrastructure Plan (FTIP) in
2016 [72]. The FTIP 2030 primarily emphasized the bolstering physical
infrastructures necessary for transitioning to a sustainable transport
sector. The discussion on PtX in the FTIP is limited to hydrogen,
highlighting support from the MFS and the AFIR to aid in infrastructure
development for alternative fuels. In this context, a summary of support
schemes by the national legal frameworks is presented inTable 5. A
further in-depth content analysis of the identified policies is presented
below.
The most important step by the German government in favor of PtX
fuels was the introduction of the GHG Reduction Quota (Treibhausgas-
Minderungsquote) in 2015 [73]. Replacing the Biofuel Quota (Biokraft-
stoffquotengesetz), this policy aims to improve the integration of re-
newable energies into the national transport sector. Acting closely
with the Federal Immission Control Act, the quota applies several
ordinances, including the ordinance on requirements for the sustainable
production of biofuels (Biofuels Sustainability Ordinance - Biokraft-
NachV), the ordinance on the crediting of upstream emission reductions
to the GHG Quota as well as other ordinances. A significant ordinance
regulating renewable fuels, specifically PtX fuels, is the 37th ordinance
on the implementation of the Federal Immission Control Act (ordinance
on the crediting of electricity-based fuels and co-processed biogenic oils
into the GHG Quota - 37th BImSchV). The GHG Reduction Quota can
be considered one of the crucial regulatory frameworks with a high
coherence with the RED II considering the inclusion of RFNBOs.
Moreover, the German government’s recognition of alternative and
sustainable fuels beyond electrification and biofuels was a gradual
process, culminating with the introduction of the MFS and the FTIP.
A significant step was taken by the German government for transform-
ing the National Platform for Electromobility (NPE) into the National
Platform for Future Mobility (NPM), a stakeholder-based consultation
process emphasizing alternative fuels in the transport sector. The NPM
specifically explored PtX and biomass-to-X (BtX) fuels for heavy-duty
road, maritime, and aviation transport. According to NPM reports, a
considerable portion of Germany’s current alternative fuels portfolio
is comprised by biofuels. Thus, reports emphasize the central role of
projects supporting PtX fuels to increase their contribution by 2030,
aiming to meet 21% of the overall demand through alternative fuels.
Notably, the NPM suggests that by 2030, Germany plans to elevate
its electrolyzer capacity to a minimum of 20 GW, with an additional
demand expected to be imported from other nations, underscoring a
fundamental aspect of Germany’s domestic PtX economy [78]. How-
ever, this creates a significant conflict with the EU Hydrogen Strategy,
which aims for a minimum capacity of 40 GW by 2030 for all member
states.
In 2021, the NPM released the Roadmap ‘‘Market ramp-ups of alter-
native drive systems and fuels from a technological perspective’’ [79].
The NPM’s roadmap presents three scenarios detailing potential market
uptakes of alternative fuels in Germany. This comprehensive plan
outlines both EU and German measures for alternative fuels. In Scenario
I, biofuels, including first-generation and advanced types, comprise a
major share of alternative fuels, with a minimal allocation for e-fuels,
primarily targeted at aviation towards the period’s conclusion. Scenario
II predicts an increased share of biofuels, alongside a slightly increased
share of e-fuels, especially earmarked for maritime use. To meet the e-
fuels quota proposed in this scenario, Germany would need to construct
three plants annually producing 100,000 tons by 2028, expanding to
five plants per year with the same capacity by 2030 [79]. Scenario IIIpresents an ambitious e-fuel plan, envisioning Germany’s establishment
of five plants by 2028, each with an annual capacity of 100,000 tons,
followed by an additional 10 plants by 2030, producing 250,000 tons
annually [79].
The Climate Action Plan is the cornerstone of Germany’s legal
framework in addressing GHG emissions. Introduced in 2016, its pri-
mary objective is to establish the necessary regulations to reduce emis-
sions across various sectors, aiming for GHG neutrality by 2050 [75]. In
addition to the focus on electrification to reduce the transport sector’s
emissions, the Climate Action Plan recognizes hydrogen as a potential
alternative for Germany’s future transport. After the transition to a
new government in 2021, Germany revised its emission reduction goals
from 55% to 65% by 2030 and currently aims for GHG neutrality
by 2045. As a result, this led to a revision of the Climate Action
Plan, which includes new and updated measures to enhance Germany’s
response to climate challenges [76]. The updated revision highlighted
robust measures, particularly in the production and utilization of green
hydrogen, renewable power and zero-emission fuels.
Following the timeline of the German legal framework, in 2020, the
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action of Germany
(BMWK) launched the National Hydrogen Strategy, which marks an
important moment for PtX fuels [74]. As green hydrogen production is
integral to PtX, this strategy profoundly shapes PtX’s future in Germany
with a target of reaching a minimum capacity of 5 GW electrolysis
by 2030. It aims to foster a robust, sustainable domestic market for
hydrogen production and usage. Anticipating a demand of 90-110 TWh
of hydrogen by 2030, and the Federal Government acknowledges the
need for renewable power in green hydrogen production. However,
due to capacity constraints, Germany acknowledges that it might not
meet all demand domestically and emphasizes the creation of platforms
for imports. The strategy emphasizes hydrogen applications in German
aviation and maritime, particularly in synthetic fuels, to drive GHG
neutrality in these sectors. To address the existing challenges and adjust
to the obstacles presented by external political events, the strategy was
most recently updated in 2023. The updated strategy aims to increase
the electrolyzer’s capacity to at least 10 GW. Moreover, other new
targets are focused on developing an efficient hydrogen infrastructure,
facilitating their use in different applications, and becoming the leading
provider of hydrogen technologies by 2030 [80].
Finally, most recently, Germany introduced the PtL roadmap to
support sustainable aviation fuels [77]. The roadmap set a target of
a minimum of 200,000 tons of PtL kerosene in German aviation by
2030. The market ramp-up is intended to meet 50,000 tons of PtL by
2026, 100,000 tons by 2028, and finally 200,000 tons by 2030. The
roadmap aims to support its target by improving its coherence with the
RED III, the National Hydrogen Strategy, the EU ETS, and the RefuelEU
Aviation.
3.3. Results of policy review & analysis
Understanding the impacts of current policies on the German trans-
port sector and the use of PtX fuels in hard-to-abate transport modes
is crucial. This understanding will play a significant role in shaping
future strategies and ensuring the effective implementation of measures
aimed at the sustainable scaling up of PtX fuels. Although Tables 4and
5present a summary of the policies, based on the content analysis,
and their support schemes, an in-depth analysis is required to under-
stand the relationships among PtX fuels, their production processes,
resources, and market instruments. In this regard, based on the coding
scheme represented inFig. 1, interrelationships between PtX fuels (in
their terminology) and other sustainable fuels and sustainable trans-
port, market instruments, innovation and R&D, different resources,
land-use and agricultural activities are analyzed.
The primary analysis was based on the data analysis approach,
introduced in the previous section. The identified policies can be dis-
sected and analyzed according to several distinct terminologies. TheEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table 5
Summary of the PtX-related support schemes in Germany.
Policy Targets & Support Schemes References
FTIP - Providing financial support for hydrogen projects.
- Allocating required financial budgets to the establishment of hydrogen production and refueling facilities.[72]
National Hydrogen
Strategy- The electrolysis target for producing green hydrogen is a minimum of 10 GW by 2030.
- Efficient use of renewable electricity, fair design of the energy price, possibility of exempting
renewable electricity from taxes and surcharges for green hydrogen production.
- Developing proper business and cooperation models for electrolyzers and the grid.
- Supporting off-shore wind power for the production of green hydrogen and PtX fuels.
- Suggesting to add a new target to the Federal Immission Control Act to increase share of hydrogen in the transport
sector.
- Presenting clear investments for electrolyzers to fulfill the target of having 2 GW installed hydrogen production
facilities by 2030.
-Recommending to improve collaboration between Germany and other EU member states in preparing to use
e-kerosene for aviation.
- Financial support will be continued via the National Innovation Programme for Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology
as well as the Energy and Climate Fund (ECF) to boost investments in hydrogen-using vehicles.
-e1.1 billion from the ECF has been earmarked to produce PtX fuels, specifically e-kerosene until 2023.
- The ECF will also provide e3.4 billion in grants to support the infrastructural developments required for alternative
fuels.
- Urging to develop an international framework to harmonize the refueling standards, hydrogen quality, calibration,
and licensing.
- Extending the research into demonstration projects on green hydrogen and PtX fuels.
- Integrating hydrogen in current energy partnerships, where Germany will be willing to have an additional investment
ofe2 billion.
- Establishing a European hydrogen company to promote and develop joint international production capacities and
infrastructure.[74]
Climate Action Plan - Proposing proper financial support for hydrogen by electrolysis and producing synthetic methane as
well as PtL fuels.
- Developing national structures for the additional production of hydrogen from offshore wind.
- The Hydrogen Global (H2Global) funding instrument is included given its importance for hydrogen in global supply
chains. Further investments are discussed for maritime and aviation to support infrastructures as well as
hydrogen-based fuels with low or zero emissions.[75,76]
GHG Reduction Quota - Defining targets to reduce GHG emissions in energy, industry, transport, agriculture and waste sectors
or to purchase emission allowance.
- Replaced the Biofuel Quota (BioKraftQuG) and is supported by the Federal Immission Control Act and Energy Tax
Act.
- Establishing a Federal Immission Protection Decree (in German: BImSchV), called 37. BImSchV, for regulating the
crediting of electricity-based fuels and processing biogenic oils on the GHG quota.
- Gradual increase in the GHG quota to 25% by 2030.
- Reducing share of first-generation biofuels, and gradually increasing the minimum share of advanced biofuels in the
quota to 2.6% by 2030.[73]
PtL Roadmap - Defining a sustainability standard based on various criteria to ensure the sustainable production of PtL fuels.
- Suggesting several sustainability criteria considering ecological, economic and social aspects as follows:
(I) Ecological: additionality of renewable energy sources, avoiding local water scarcity, land use and land rights, and
sustainable carbon sourcing.
(II) Economic: economic viability, contribution to local value chain, inclusion of local actors, and international
networking.
(III) Social: working condition, protecting legal security and against corruption, capacity building, and transparency.
- Urging to transpose the EU requirements into German law in terms of GHG quota within the Federal Immission
Control Act.
- Pointing out the possibility of cutting costs through several credits for by-products such as green hydrogen from the
production of PtL kerosene.
- Highlighting the fuel quota introduced by the RED II to ensure 50,000 PtL tons in 2026, and 200,000 PtL tons by
2030.
- As PtL fuels would not be available everywhere at first, the stakeholders involved in the roadmap are looking into
the possibility of developing trustworthy accounting guidelines that would allow airlines to buy PtL kerosene beyond
their route network and use it as an emissions offset within the framework of suitable accounting systems.
- Several national funding opportunities arise through different ministries and institutions such as the ECF accounting
fore1.3 billion for the production of PtX fuels.
- The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy proposed providing e87 million for the production and use of
PtX fuels.[77]
frequency of occurrence of the defined terminologies is as follows: PtX
(181 occurrences, including PtG and PtL), PtL (161), PtG (7), RFNBOs
(53), carbon-based fuels (10), e-fuels (66), and ammonia (50). Addi-
tionally, the occurrence frequency of related terms, such as alternative
fuels, synthetic fuels, SAFs, hydrogen, and green hydrogen, is recorded
as 227, 24, 264, 3166, and 239, respectively. The analysis of the
frequency of occurrence of various key terms provides valuable insights
into the focus areas within the discourse on sustainable fuels. Notably,
PtL has received more attention compared to the general term of PtX in
the transition towards sustainable transport. The frequency of related
terms, including alternative fuels, synthetic fuels, and hydrogen, furtheremphasizes the growing interest in PtX fuels. However, while these
insights are informative, they underscore the need for further analysis.
A deeper exploration of these terms and their interrelations with key
challenges is essential to fully understand the implications for policy
development in a climate-neutral transport sector.
Understanding the interrelationship between PtX fuels and the re-
sources required for their production is crucial for optimizing their
implementation and ensuring sustainable energy transitions against a
backdrop of robust regulatory support. In this regard, Fig. 2(a) visu-
alizes the interrelationship between various elements in the context
of policy documents, highlighting the roles of solar and wind power,Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 2.Interrelationships between PtX fuels and the relevant resources within the regulatory frameworks.
water, carbon, bio-based feedstock, and DAC in the production of PtX
fuels. The size of each node reflects the frequency of each term’s
occurrence, while the thickness of the edges between connected nodes
indicates how often those terms co-occur within the same policy doc-
uments. The distance between nodes signifies the overall frequency of
co-occurrence across all policy documents. The findings indicate that
carbon and wind power are the most frequently mentioned terms in
the policy documents. A significant observation is the large distance
of DAC from other resources, suggesting a lack of support for it as a
viable carbon capture pathway. Most importantly, all resources exhibit
a relatively large distance from PtX fuels, highlighting potential gaps
in integration and focus within the current policies. Using the findings
of the content analysis from the previous section to complement the in-
terrelationships between resources and PtX fuels, renewable electricity
generated from solar and wind power, along with carbon utilization,
are extensively addressed in regulatory discussions concerning PtX
fuels. In contrast, water systems emerged as one of the resources least
discussed in a cohesive manner alongside other policies supporting PtX
fuels. This lack of emphasis on water resources highlights a significant
oversight, as the effective management of water systems is essential for
the sustainable production of PtX fuels.
Considering the key role of green hydrogen in the production of PtX
fuels, Fig. 2(b)illustrates the interrelationships between various termi-
nologies related to PtX fuels (E-fuels and RFNBOs) and hydrogen as well
as green hydrogen. This visualization helps to clarify how these terms
connect and emphasizes the significance of green hydrogen within thebroader context of sustainable energy solutions for transport sector.
Considering the intermediary role of PtX fuels between resources and
sustainable transport in the graph, hydrogen appears as a key element
highlighted in the policy documents, closely linked to green hydrogen
and ammonia. The analysis indicates relatively short distances between
hydrogen and PtX fuels, and its interchangeable term, ‘‘e-fuels’’. How-
ever, RFNBOs, as introduced in RED II, are positioned further away,
indicating a lesser focus or integration in current discussions. The lesser
focus on RFNBOs may indicate a gap in understanding their potential
role or significance in the broader context of energy transition strategies
as well as low relevancy to the previous defossilization strategies. This
highlights the need for further exploration and consideration of these
renewable fuels in future analyses. In addition, the emphasis on e-fuels
and its close connection with hydrogen and green hydrogen can be
attributed to ongoing discussions in German policies, mainly focused
on the terms ‘‘e-fuels’’ and ‘‘electricity-based fuels’’. This focus reflects
the strategic importance placed on integrating e-fuels into the energy
landscape, positioning them as crucial components in the transition to
sustainable transport.
The current emphasis on green hydrogen relies on the availability
and supply of renewable electricity for electrolysis. To advance the
analysis, we examined various PtX terminologies and their intercon-
nections with renewable electricity, electrolysis, hydrogen, and other
sustainable fuels, such as SAFs, synthetic fuels, alternative fuels, and
carbon-based fuels. Fig. 2(c), similar toFig. 2(b), shows that RFNBOs
and carbon-based fuels exhibit less integration within the policiesEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
connected to hydrogen and renewable electricity. This low coherence
arises from the lack of in-depth mechanisms for supporting hydrogen
production within the RED III and other fuel-based EU policies. Support
for hydrogen, particularly green hydrogen, is primarily derived from
the hydrogen strategies in the EU and Germany, which tend to address
general technical issues rather than focusing on future hydrogen pro-
jections tied to specific fuel alternatives. This gap highlights the need
for more targeted policy measures to effectively support the sustainable
development of hydrogen as a fuel source or part of the production
process for PtX fuels.
Another key but often overlooked topic in the field is the impact of
sustainable transport practices, such as the use of PtX fuels, on land-use
change and agriculture. This aspect is crucial for understanding how
the transition to alternative fuels may affect land resources, agricultural
practices, and environmental sustainability. Based on the content anal-
ysis in the previous sections, there is limited scope in current EU and
German policies regarding the regulation of bio-based feedstock, such
as bio-based carbon feedstock, for PtX fuels. In this regard, Fig. 2(d)dis-
plays low coherence between these elements with sustainable transport,
particularly highlighted by thin edges that indicate a low co-occurrence
in the same policies.
Moving from the lower to the upper layers of the PtX value chain,
the analysis of policy documents was expanded to examine the market
development of these fuels. This includes evaluating the roles of key
regulatory instruments such as subsidies, incentives as well as financial
supports for innovation and R&D. Understanding these factors is crucial
for fostering a supportive environment for the growth and integration
of PtX fuels in the current competitive energy market with numerous
fuel alternatives. First, an analysis was made based on potential in-
terrelationships between PtX fuels and market mechanisms. Fig. 3(a)
highlights key roles of incentives and innovation programs and funds
as market mechanisms for the market diffusion of PtX fuels. On the
other hand, subsidies appear to play a less significant role among mar-
ket mechanisms, as validated by the content analysis in the previous
section.
Addressing the challenges within the PtX supply chain and fostering
technical, social, and environmental innovations are essential concepts
that necessitate investments in R&D projects. Fig. 3(b) illustrates the
strong role of R&D as an intermediary between PtX fuels and green
hydrogen, highlighting R&D’s critical contributions in the areas of elec-
trolysis and fuel synthesis, and emphasizing how advancements in these
technologies can enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of hydrogen
production and PtX fuel development. Similarly, Fig. 3(c)extends this
analysis by including innovation and R&D as two key mechanisms
for market development. It highlights a triangular interrelationship
between innovation, the market, and R&D, emphasizing their combined
role in enhancing the PtX fuel supply chain.
To further explore these interrelationships, connections between
various policies were investigated. After investigating the interrela-
tionships between these policies, we analyzed policy documents and
mapped them using a simple matching method, focusing on the cov-
erage rate of specific fuel alternatives. In this method, matches were
defined based on the number of codes or variable values that are
identical in both documents (a) and those that do not exist in either
document (d). The calculation accounts for codes that only exist in one
document (b and c), allowing us to derive a ratio match by using the
following formula: Simple match =(a+d)/(a +b+c+d). This method
enables a comprehensive comparison of how different policies address
various fuel alternatives.
The initial analysis centers on two commonly used terminologies
for PtX fuels: e-fuels and RFNBOs. According to the results, policies
are categorized into six groups: (I) the ReFuelEU Aviation, FuelEU
Maritime, RED III and REPowerEU with a major focus on RFNBOs
and e-fuels; (II) the AFIR, Climate Action Plan, EED, EU H2 Strategy,
and Hydrogen Bank with a focus on only e-fuels; (III) the MFS, PtL
Roadmap, SSMS, and 37. BImSchv covering e-fuels and PtX fuels; (IV)the ETS, FTIP and Hydrogen and Decarbonized Gas Market Package
only mentioning PtX fuels; (V) German H2 Strategy, as the only strategy
covering all three terminologies; (VI) no mention of three terminologies
in the rest of the policies.
In the second step, an analysis was carried out on the basis of the
resources needed to produce PtX fuels. The analysis covers DAC, renew-
able electricity from solar and wind power, water, and hydrogen as well
as green hydrogen. Based on the coding scheme, only two policies-the
PtL Roadmap and ReFuelEU Aviation-explicitly address and regulate
DAC as a carbon source for PtX fuels. While other policies do not
provide clear support for DAC facilities, carbon capture and storage
is addressed in a significant number of policies (e.g., the RED III).
The second resource analyzed is renewable electricity from solar and
wind power. According to the coding scheme, policies can be evaluated
in different ways. First, based on the frequency of the occurrence of
the codes, the RED III and EEG emerge as the key policies with the
highest frequency values. On the other hand, based on the occurrence
of the codes, policies are categorized into six groups: (I) the Climate
Action Plan, EED, EU H2 Strategy, GDIP, FuelEU Maritime, MFS, NZIA,
RED III, REPowerEU and SCF are key policies extensively addressing
all three terminologies; (II) the CBAM, 37. BImSchv and German H2
strategy are other policies that address three terminologies for renew-
able electricity with lower rates of occurrence; (III) the EEG, ETD, and
Hydrogen and Decarbonized Gas Market Package are additional policies
that primarily address this issue by focusing on the terminology of
solar and wind power, rather than specifically referring to renewable
electricity; (IV) the FTIP and SSMS exclusively reference wind power,
whereas the AFIR, Hydrogen Bank, PtL Roadmap, and ReFuelEU focus
solely on renewable electricity.
Water and hydrogen are other resources needed for producing PtX
fuels. Although water is highlighted in most of the identified policies
as a key element, no policy specifically regulates its utilization for hy-
drogen production within the context of renewable fuels. On the other
hand, hydrogen itself, especially green hydrogen, has been discussed
in most of the identified policies as well. In contrast to water, hydro-
gen is regulated through multiple policies that focus on its technical,
economic, social, environmental, and political dimensions. Notably,
the EEG, EU CAP, and LULUCF are the only policies that do not
mention hydrogen at all. On the other hand, the 37th BImSchv, AFIR,
Climate Action Plan, EED, ESR, FTIP, FuelEU Maritime, MFS, SCF, and
SSMS only address hydrogen in general scope. The remaining policies
consider green hydrogen within their frameworks or discussions.
4. Current initiatives and deployments in Germany
To transition from policy analysis to the current status and devel-
opments of PtX fuels, it is essential to recognize how these policies
translate into practical applications. Understanding the current land-
scape of PtX fuels requires an examination of recent advancements,
ongoing projects, and market dynamics. This exploration could provide
useful insights into the progress of policy measures and their impact on
the growth and integration of PtX fuels in the transport sector.
4.1. Status quo of Germany
Beyond the regulatory and legal institutions, industrial organiza-
tions as well as R&D institutions have shown strong interest in the
development of PtX. For instance, the Forschungsvereinigung Verbren-
nungskraftmaschinen (FVV) (Research Association for Internal Combus-
tion Engines) [81], Deutsche Energie-Agentur (DENA) (German Energy
Agency) [82], Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (Fraun-
hofer ISE) [83], and Fuel Science Center [84] have conducted extensive
research into PtX fuels. The International PtX Hub is another key
institution addressing PtX fuels [85], which is implemented by the
German Development Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Interna-
tionale Zusammenarbeit, GIZ) on behalf of the BMWK. The PtX HubEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 3.PtX fuels, market and R&D within the regulatory frameworks.
is funded through the International Climate Initiative (Internationale
Klimaschutzinitiative) as a pivot for the National Hydrogen Strategy.
The International PtX Hub has become a fundamental organization,
providing platforms for the knowledge diffusion and accelerating the
market development of PtX fuels on a global scale. Similarly, in 2021,
the PtX Lab Lausitz, another BMWK-funded project, was officially
established as a business unit of Zukunft - Umwelt - Gesellschaft (ZUG)
gGmbH [86]. The PtX Lab Lausitz is dedicated to PtX fuels, with a
specific focus on PtL fuels. Moreover, the Technology Platform PtL
Fuels (TPP) project is another initiative funded by the Federal Ministry
for Digital and Transport (BMDV) and is planned to be cooperatively
implemented by the German Aerospace Center (DLR), NOW GmbH and
VDI/VDE Innovation +Technik GmbH [87].
As discussed earlier, Germany is one of the leading countries to
explore the development of PtX fuels for transport and industry [19,
23]. In this regard, Table A.2presents an overview of PtX plants
in Germany, pointing out their location, final product, capacity, and
the beginning of the operating period [88]. A summary of current
developments in Germany is illustrated inFig. 4. In this regard, North
Rhine-Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and Schleswig-Holstein are the states
with the highest production capacity of 2276, 2121 and 1758 MW,
followed by Saxony-Anhalt, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Brandenburg,
and Hamburg, respectively. Based onTable A.2andFig. 4(a), hydrogen
serves as a primary component or an integral part of the final products
in the majority of the plants (127 plants), followed byCH4in 37 plants,
NH3in four plants, MeOH in 12 plants, and synthetic hydrocarbons in
19 plants. 89 of these plants were established before 2020, while 85
were either established after this date or are planned to be established
subsequently. Currently, 35 out of the 85 plants are undergoing feasi-
bility analysis. Moreover, in total, 650 carbon sources are in operation,
in the planning phase, or decommissioned in Germany. In Germany,the energy sector, waste and wastewater treatment, biomethanol pro-
cessing facilities, and mining are the primary sectors serving as sources
ofCO2emissions, with 155, 74, 243, and 62 facilities, respectively. Of
these states, North Rhine-Westphalia has the highest carbon potential
at 168 Mt per year, followed by Brandenburg with 50 Mt (Fig. 4(b)).
Hydrogen consumption in Germany is primarily observed in hydrogen
filling stations, the chemical industry, the steel industry, and ammonia
production. The highest hydrogen consumption is recorded in North
Rhine-Westphalia (Fig. 4(c)). Saxony, Thuringia, and Bavaria stand out
as leading states with a significant number of R&D projects focused on
PtX (Fig. 4(d)).
Considering the importance of PtL fuels for the aviation and mar-
itime sectors and its prominence in the identified national and EU
policies, several R&D projects have been established in recent years,
or are being planned. Table A.3presents R&D projects supported
by Germany’s government in different federal states. Bavaria and
Baden-Württemberg, each with eight projects, emerge as key states
spearheading the development of PtL-based projects and plants. Ad-
ditionally, Saxony and Lower Saxony, collectively boasting 11 projects,
also play pivotal roles in this endeavor. There is a significant emphasis
on leveraging PtL fuels for aviation purposes. E-kerosene, also known
as PtL-based kerosene, is the main or part of the final products of
several projects, including eFuels Kraftstoffe neu denken, Ineratec, Iner-
atec/SCHWENK, Projekt  OMV Burghausen, PtX Lab Lausitz,
HyEast, KEROSyN100, Jangada, Concrete Chemicals, Technologie-
Plattform, Kompetenzzentrum für Klima-und ärmschutz im Luftverkehr,
E-Kerosin-aus-der-Luft, GG2L, Solarbelt, PtL Shell, DAWN, Elektroly-
seanlage für Wasserstoff aus regenerativen Energien, EDL Anlagenbau
GmbH, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, and Green Fuels Lausitz. EWiK,
Hy2Lausitz, Technologie-Plattform, and DOW Stade - Green MeOH are
the only projects explicitly dedicated to producing PtL-based maritime
fuels.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 4.An overview of the PtX economy in Germany [88].
4.2. National and international initiatives
Exploring national and regional initiatives provides valuable in-
sights into the potential of PtX fuels, especially considering hydrogen’s
significant role, particularly green hydrogen, in their production. The
national hydrogen strategy and the EU’s hydrogen strategy have en-
couraged federal states in Germany to focus on establishing laws that
support the development of the hydrogen economy. Fig. 5illustrates
the federal states of Germany categorized into three groups: those witha specific hydrogen strategy, those with a joint strategy, and those with
only discussion documents on key actions for hydrogen development.
Berlin, Bremen, Bavaria, Hessen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Saarland,
Baden-Württemberg, and Thuringia are the states with a hydrogen
strategy. Northern states mainly share a joint hydrogen strategy, while
states in the east of Germany have formalized their efforts with respect
to the hydrogen economy to a lesser degree. Hamburg has its own
strategy for importing hydrogen, but it is also part of a joint hydrogen
strategy with other northern states. Rhineland-Palatinate is the onlyEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 5.Hydrogen strategies of the federal states [89].
state without a specific regulatory plan for hydrogen development.
Fig. A.2demonstrates the timeline for development of hydrogen-related
legal frameworks in all states. The initial efforts regarding hydrogen
initiatives emerged in May 2019 in North Rhine-Westphalia. The first
comprehensive hydrogen strategy was launched jointly by the Northern
German states (Bremen, Hamburg, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania,
Lower Saxony, and Schleswig-Holstein) in November 2019. Soon there-
after, other states also decided to adopt hydrogen strategies to regulate
the development of hydrogen projects in accordance with federal laws
and targets. The most recent state to unveil its hydrogen strategy was
Saxony, introduced in December 2021 [89]. This was followed by an
import-oriented strategy for Hamburg and a roadmap for Bavaria.
According to the recent update of the national hydrogen strat-
egy, the German government estimates that around 50%-70% of the
projected demand for hydrogen in 2030 will need to be met through im-
ports [80]. Therefore, encouraging and supporting international part-
nerships and collaborations between Germany and other countries
is essential for the large-scale use of PtX fuels. As a leader in the
production and export of PtX technologies and hydrogen, Germany
aims to establish solid partnerships with countries that have significant
potential for producing PtX fuels. For this purpose, a specific strategy
entitled, ‘‘Import Strategy for Hydrogen and Hydrogen Derivatives’’ was
adopted in July 2024 to support Germany’s hydrogen policy and the
government’s commitment to developing the domestic market [90].
This strategy aims to create investment security for hydrogen produc-
tion in partner countries and foster the development of the necessary
import infrastructure. Moreover, it ensures that Germany’s demand for
hydrogen and its derivatives is met while maintaining a resilient supply
chain, providing reliance for the German industry as a key actor inthe hydrogen market. The strategy is supposed to be implemented with
consideration to five policy dimensions: (I) climate and environmental
policy to meet international, European and German climate and energy
targets; (II) energy and economic policy for securing hydrogen and
its derivatives across various end-uses, particularly in industry and
transport; (III) European and neighborhood policy to enable pipeline-
based imports from the EU and countries neighboring the EU; (IV)
foreign and security policy to construct diversified, resilient import
routes for hydrogen and its derivatives; (V) development policy to
advance an energy transition in developing countries and emerging
economies that is both socially equitable and sustainable.
The strategy identifies various hydrogen derivatives, including am-
monia, methanol, and FT products. To meet current and future de-
mands of these derivatives, the strategy proposes a framework based
on measures and instruments to support a ramp-up of their imports.
The proposed measures and instruments are categorized as follows:
•Fostering the demand side: ETS, ReFuelEU Aviation, FuelEU Mar-
itime, RED III, Carbon Contracts for Difference, Federal Funding
for Industry and Climate Action, H2Global, Power Plant Strat-
egy, Innovation Fund, Important Projects of Common European
Interest, and Funding for R&D and transport market activation.
•Creation of sustainable import infrastructure: Hydrogen core net-
work, Hydrogen Acceleration Act, Hydrogen Storage Strategy, EU
Gas and Hydrogen Internal Market Package, LNG Acceleration
Act, National Port Strategy, and the National Action Plan for
Climate-Friendly Shipping.
•Product requirements and certification processes: EU Gas and
Hydrogen Internal Market Package, RED III, Supply Chain Due
Diligence Act, and NHS monitoring.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 6.Germany’s global energy partnerships [91,92].
•Funding of the international supply of hydrogen and derivatives:
Hydrogen Bank, H2Global, EIB Green Hydrogen Fund, funding
guidelines for international hydrogen projects, PtX Development
Fund, and climate policy sector guidelines.
•International cooperation: Partner countries in the EU/EFTA, cli-
mate and energy/hydrogen partnerships, Just Energy Transition
Partnerships, Hydrogen research partnerships, International Cli-
mate Initiative, and H2-diplo.
•R&D: Feasibility studies, applied research projects, basic research
projects, demonstration projects, and Hydrogen Technology and
Innovation Roadmap.
In this context, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Coop-
eration and Development established the PtX Development Fund in
2022 with a budget ofe270 million to initiate large-scale hydrogen
projects in partner countries. Its objective is to create local value
chains and foster a supportive economic environment for developing
green hydrogen economies. In its first call for project applications, the
PtX development fund considers Brazil, Egypt, Georgia, India, Kenya,
Morocco, and South Africa as eligible countries. However, in order
to conduct an in-depth analysis of current and future projects, it is
essential to understand Germany’s partnerships and collaborations. This
understanding will provide valuable insights into the strategic frame-
works and initiatives shaping the development of PtX and hydrogen
projects globally.
For this purpose, Fig. 6represents an overview of Germany’s global
energy partnerships according to the most recent energy and climate
partnerships and energy dialogues [91,92]. Countries marked in green
represent those whose partnership with Germany is fully or partially
based on hydrogen projects. Since 2022, bilateral hydrogen partner-
ships have been made with Australia, Chile, Canada, Morocco, Namibia,
and Saudi Arabia. In the same manner, countries highlighted in or-
ange are those with explicit projects on PtX or other synthetic fuels
within their partnership with Germany. Countries marked in blue do
not address hydrogen or PtX but still have energy partnership with
Germany. Following the Russia-Ukraine war, the decision to become
energy-independent from Russian oil, encouraged Germany to enhance
its strong partnerships for renewable energy expansion, including hy-
drogen and PtX, aiming to improve market ramp-up toward 2030 and
2045. Currently, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Namibia, the United Arab Emi-
rates, Oman, and Qatar have directly specified PtX in their partnerships
with Germany.For hydrogen, Germany follows initiatives and partnerships with
different countries. Four of the most recent partnerships are
the Germany-Denmark Hydrogen Network, the Germany-Namibia co-
operation for green hydrogen, the Canada-Germany Energy Partnership
with a specific focus on instruments for hydrogen development, and
the German-Australia Hydrogen Alliance. Considering the Denmark’s
PtX potential, as well as its political and economic role among Ger-
many’s neighboring countries, an agreement has been reached to build
a green hydrogen pipeline by 2028. Moreover, Denmark has been
actively planning the North Sea Energy Island project, which aims
to create a large-scale renewable energy hub in the North Sea. The
project is designed to have a capacity of up to 10 GW of wind power,
enabling the production of significant amounts of e-fuels for aviation
and maritime. Australia is another key partner for Germany in meeting
its future projected demand for hydrogen, particularly green hydrogen.
The country boasts abundant renewable energy resources, including
wind and solar power, which can be used to produce green hydrogen.
Recently in 2024, a new agreement deepened the cooperation on new
green hydrogen supply chains viae400 million (e660 million) H2
Global funding window to guarantee European buyers for Australia’s
renewable hydrogen producers.
To strengthen the collaborations and highlight the potential of
partner countries in PtX projects, Hank et al. [83] conducted a cost
analysis study using an optimization-based genetic algorithm, a techno-
economic model, and Geographic Information System to analyze poten-
tial PtX pathways and products in developing and emerging countries.
For this purpose, 12 countries including Brazil, South Africa, Ukraine,
Colombia, India, Namibia, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Mexico, Spain,
and Australia were considered. The four main PtX products to be
analyzed were ammonia, methanol, e-kerosene, gaseous and liquid
hydrogen. In order to achieve the promised targets within the PtX
dialogues between Germany and partner countries, Hank et al. [83]
presented country-specific discussions on the production pathways, PtX
products, and supply chain costs. Among all the countries analyzed,
Brazil, Australia, and Spain emerge as standouts. Several investigated
regions exhibit PtX production costs below 200 EUR/MWh for the year
2030, enabling production volumes of up to 4 TWh per year per project.
Moreover, in many instances, favorable conditions that combine wind
and PV power generation can prove more beneficial than locations with
exceptionally good conditions for either wind or PV alone. Such decent
hybrid renewable energy sites contribute to increased utilization andEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Fig. 7.Overview of the existing and planned PtX projects for aviation and shipping.
reduced reliance on intermediate hydrogen storage. Hank et al. [83]
also highlight the importance of infrastructural networks and process
chains downstream from the import stage in order to optimize the
supply chain. A more in-depth analysis of countries in terms of their po-
tential for producing PtX fuels-considering relevant production areas,
potential generation volumes, socio-economic support, fuel production
costs, and transportation expenses-can significantly aid in identifying
and prioritizing the leading exporting countries [93].
4.3. European PtX projects for aviation and maritime
In the transport sector, there is a considerable need for PtL-derived
kerosene (e-kerosene) to reduce aviation emissions, as well as e-fuels
derivatives for maritime emissions. In aviation, in order to meet the Re-
FuelEU’s synthetic fuel blending requirements of 1.2% in 2030, the pro-
duction capacity needs to be over one million tons. To achieve the bind-
ing targets, several projects are going on in the EU (Fig. 7(a)). In 2024,
the European Federation for Transport and Environment identified 45
e-kerosene projects in several countries, including Germany, France,Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Norway, the UK, Iceland, and Greece, as well
as 18 pilot demonstration projects [50].
Fig. 7(a)shows that Norway leads with a total production capacity
reaching 420,000 tons of e-kerosene by 2030, approximately a quarter
of the total projections. Two companies, Nordic Electrofuel and Norsk
e-Fuel, have ambitious plans to capture a substantial portion of the
European market. Norway’s advantage lies in its stable access to re-
newable energy from hydropower at a comparatively low cost, which
explains its current leadership in the e-kerosene sector, given that
electricity represents a significant cost factor in e-fuel production [50].
Next, the collective production capacity of all six identified full-scale in-
dustrial projects in France is projected to reach approximately 300,000
tons of e-kerosene by 2030 [50]. With an anticipated production ca-
pacity of around 300,000 tons in 2030 and three significant projects,
Germany is experiencing the benefits of its proactive PtL roadmap in
promoting e-kerosene production [50]. Conversely, Sweden is taking a
distinctly different approach compared to other European countries, as
all of their projects are centered around PBtX. Given Germany’s plan to
incorporate at least 0.5%, 1%, and 2% of e-kerosene in German airportsEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
by 2026, 2028, and 2030, respectively, it is crucial to prioritize the
forging of partnerships with other European countries.
Following the targets introduced by the FuelEU Maritime to de-
crease GHG intensity by 80% by 2050, e-fuels such as e-ammonia,
e-methanol, and e-diesel are expected to play key roles in the sec-
tor [94]. In this regard, 17 projects with a capacity of 1.06 million
tons of oil equivalent are fully dedicated to shipping, while another 25
projects with a capacity of 1.9 million tons of oil equivalent include
shipping as one of the end-users [94].Fig. 7(b) illustrates existing
(or confirmed) and planned projects within the EU. Considering all
potential e-fuels, including green hydrogen, Denmark plays a key role,
with a total capacity of 3.61 million tons of oil equivalent, followed
by Spain and Portugal. However, for projects specifically dedicated to
shipping, Spain and Finland emerge as the leading countries. Finland
has one project, Kokkola Renewable Ammonia, with a capacity of
780,000 tons of e-ammonia per year. After Finland, Spain has two
projects totaling 357,000 tons, Norway has five projects with a capacity
of 178,000 tons, Sweden has three projects with 119,000 tons, Germany
has two projects with 47,000 tons, and the UK has one project with
9750 tons [94].
5. Discussions: Lessons learned & policy implications
Transitioning Germany’s transport sector to cleaner, low-carbon
energy sources is essential for meeting the country’s climate targets for
2030 and 2045. Despite numerous policies being introduced in Ger-
many and the EU aimed at defossilizing the sector, minimal emission
reductions have been achieved since the 1990s. Increased transport de-
mand and the introduction of new regulatory frameworks have created
uncertainty regarding whether current instruments will be sufficient to
meet future targets while contributing to sustained high GHG emissions
in the sector. Although PtX fuels offer promises for emission reduction,
their demand remains low due to their high production costs, inefficient
production processes as well as the dominance of the lobbies for fossil
fuels in the market [38,95]. In this regard, the key challenges of
developing PtX fuels, along with the policy implications derived from
the results of the coding scheme and content analysis, are presented as
follows.
5.1. Key challenges
Important challenges related to the utilization of PtX fuels in the
current transport sector are caused by the lack of infrastructure, in-
sufficient policies for supporting PtX technologies and the required
production capacity, as well as an insufficient understanding of the
sustainability implications. Based on the findings, the key challenges in
this regard include difficulties in securing the necessary resources for
producing PtX fuels, challenges in meeting projected demand and the
potential role of imports from other countries, and the lack of adequate
regulatory support, which is often either insufficient or still in early
stages of development.
A critical issue was identified regarding the volatility in the avail-
ability of renewable electricity, carbon, and water as the essential
elements to produce PtX fuels. In the case of renewable electricity,
further development of PtX projects is strongly influenced by the EEG
feed-in tariff and the national renewable electricity capacity. Thus,
reaching a minimum share of 80% in electricity generation by renew-
able sources, as the main goal of the EEG, could play a significant
role for PtX production with economic costs in Germany and the
EU. Currently, carbon is primarily sourced from biogenic materials,
industrial processes, and point sources, while DAC facilities are not
yet economically viable. Therefore, the German government should
consider the economic feasibility of DAC facilities when developing
future policies on carbon capture and storage. Moreover, water utiliza-
tion requires more targeted regulatory support to effectively manage
its demand in large-scale plants. The complexity of PtX productionreflects a water-energy-carbon nexus, highlighting the need for a robust
policy framework for effective management. Given its vital role in
hydrogen production, water should be regulated within this nexus.
Ensuring sustainable water use is essential not only for maximizing
hydrogen yield but also for preventing potential conflicts over water
resources, particularly in regions where water scarcity may become
an issue as demand for hydrogen grows. In the long term and with
increased demand for hydrogen and PtX fuels, the existence of specified
legislation on water systems could optimize the process and prevent
potential conflicts. Another challenge concerning key resources is the
availability of bio-based carbon feedstock for PBtX fuels, which poses
constraints on their production and scalability. The RED III labels
RFNBOs according to their non-biological feedstock; however, it does
not address potential challenges, such as the limited availability of bio-
based feedstock from non-biological sources in light of the increasing
fuel demand.
Fulfilling the demand for PtX fuels, particularly in the aviation and
maritime sectors, is likely to surpass projected national production
capacities. Considering the potential regions for producing PtX fuels
in the Global PtX Atlas [93], importing PtX fuels will be essential for
Germany to meet future demand. An important sustainability principle
is the CBAM, which plays a key role in PtX importing within the various
inter-governmental partnerships outlined in the previous sections. Par-
ticularly for carbon, the CBAM obliges other countries seeking to invest
in PtX fuels for the purpose of export to Germany in order to follow
the EU mandates on import countries on specific criteria regarding
carbon sources in the production of PtX fuels. The EU aims to ensure
that the utilization of carbon for renewable fuels does not lead to
lock-in effects concerning existing CO2emissions and protects national
producers under an effective national carbon pricing system similar to
the EU ETS. Ensuring compliance with such regulations is crucial for
realizing the effective mitigation of climate change, particularly in the
medium and long terms. However, implementing the necessary legal
regulations will require time and careful consideration. This indicates
that investments being made for the European market from outside the
EU that adhere to the regulatory targets will ensure the immediate and
crucial import of these fuels in a sustainable way [96].
The development of PtX projects plays a significant role in improv-
ing the integration of several sectors in favor of renewable energy
production, aligned with the RED III targets. In Germany, prior to
the PtL roadmap, binding PtL subquotas for aviation were introduced
within the 37. BImSchV of the GHG reduction quota. While the PtL
roadmap provides exclusive regulatory support and defines specific
targets for the aviation sector, Germany requires more comprehensive
roadmaps or policies to specify targets for various PtX end products
across different end-uses. AsFig. 6shows, Germany has a complex
and inter-governmental global supply chain for hydrogen and PtX.
Presently, numerous projects are in the planning phase, and a limited
number are in the operating phase in countries that aim to export end
products to Germany. To meet its targets for aviation, Germany can
expand its partnerships with other European countries that face fewer
challenges regarding renewable electricity generation with ongoing
or planned projects (Fig. 7(a)). On the other hand, the demand for
PtX fuels in maritime transport has encountered significant challenges.
Unlike aviation, the maritime transport sector and its energy market
have historically been distinct from other sectors, offering a variety
of fuel alternatives to replace fossil fuels, including e-ammonia, e-
diesel, and e-methanol [94]. A key regulatory challenge in this regard
is the absence of national policies, like the PtL Roadmap for Aviation,
within the maritime sector to effectively regulate the deployment and
utilization of e-fuels.
5.2. Policy implications
Building on the discussions outlined above, this section presents rec-
ommendations for a mixed policy framework that incorporates cross-
sectoral policies to effectively address the challenges to deploying andEnergy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
developing PtX fuels in Germany. To effectively understand the key
challenges, it is crucial to have a clear understanding of the risks and
benefits associated with PtX fuels. This understanding is crucial for
shaping sound future policies that ensure the adoption and diffusion
of these fuels in aviation and maritime transport. A comprehensive
analysis is essential to evaluating all potential components within the
PtX value chain, promoting these fuels in the future energy system, and
identifying their most suitable applications.
Starting with regulatory challenges, a significant issue with the
current framework is the unclear definition of the steps needed to
meet the established target quotas for PtX fuels by 2030 and 2045.
A comprehensive analysis of the PtX value chain could yield valuable
insights for developing effective roadmaps to achieving these target
quotas. This is due to the fact that the production process of PtX
fuels involves multiple complex steps, requiring a reliable supply of
renewable electricity, water, carbon, and bio-based feedstock (for PBtX
fuels and carbon).
At the bottom of the value chain, as discussed earlier, the lack of
proper policies regulating water use in electrolyzers is a key insuffi-
ciency in the EU and Germany’s policy frameworks. One of the key
policies regulating water sources is the Water Framework Directive,
which primarily focuses on protecting and improving the quality of
water resources across member states [97]. Its main objectives include
preventing and reducing pollution, promoting sustainable water use,
protecting aquatic ecosystems, and ensuring the long-term availabil-
ity of sufficient water of good quality. Therefore, updating previous
relevant policies or introducing a specified policy on water use for
hydrogen production could facilitate optimized pathways for water use
and prevent potential conflicts with other sectors.
Continuing with the previous discussion derived from the content
analysis on regulatory challenges related to water use in electrolyzers,
the necessity for certification in the hydrogen sector has become in-
creasingly apparent. As the demand for hydrogen grows, establishing
robust certification systems is essential to ensuring the sustainability
and environmental integrity of its production. Certification can pro-
vide a framework for verifying the origin and quality of hydrogen,
particularly in distinguishing between green hydrogen produced from
renewable sources and hydrogen derived from fossil fuels. In this
regard, drawing from the lessons of hastily ramping up the biofuels
market at the expense of sustainability standards, it is beneficial to
create a level playing field across different sectors by implementing
certification principles that apply to all markets and products in avia-
tion and maritime transport. The certification systems should meet key
requirements, including simplicity, transparency, coherence with other
policies, and alignment with stakeholders’ opinions. Ensuring that the
certification process is straightforward will facilitate broader adoption
and understanding among producers and consumers of PtX fuels. In
addition, transparency is essential for building trust in the certification
systems, allowing stakeholders to easily verify the sustainability claims
associated with hydrogen production and its integration into PtX fuels.
Moreover, the certification should be coherent with existing policies
governing PtX fuels to avoid conflicts and ensure a unified regulatory
framework. Finally, engaging stakeholders in the development of the
certification criteria has been suggested as a possibility for ensuring
that the system addresses their concerns and incorporates their insights,
fostering greater acceptance and compliance for PtX fuels [98]. Ex-
isting certificates currently regulate hydrogen through hydrogen from
renewable energy resources (International Sustainability & Carbon Cer-
tification), TÜV SÜD Green Hydrogen, and CertifHy. Certification could
also be extended to specific PtX end-products, ensuring that not only
the hydrogen used in their production meets sustainability criteria but
also the final fuels themselves. This would involve establishing clear
standards for various PtX fuels, such as e-kerosene, e-ammonia, e-
diesel, and e-methanol, focusing on their production processes, carbon
footprint, and overall environmental impact.Another resource with uncertain regulations for use in PtX fu-
els is carbon sourced from biogenic materials, industrial processes,
point sources, and bio-based carbon feedstock. Carbon capture through
DAC facilities has been suggested as a sustainable method for utiliz-
ing carbon in the production of PtX fuels. However, high costs and
the early-stage readiness of technology pose significant challenges in
this regard. Extending existing policies to support sustainable carbon
utilization in PtX fuels can increasingly reduce emissions across the
value chain. Moreover, the next challenge relates to bio-based carbon
feedstock for PBtX fuels, which must be sourced exclusively from non-
biological origins, as defined by the RFNBOs in the RED II. Given the
rising demand for PtX and PBtX (e-biofuels) as sustainable marine fuels
and SAFs, the regulatory framework should establish clear regulations
to support the supply of bio-based carbon feedstock sourced from non-
biological origins. Given the limitations of bio-based feedstock and
concerns regarding land-use change, the regulatory framework could
enhance coherence between fuel policies, the EU CAP, and the LULUCF.
Moreover, a serious challenge remains in the acceptability of re-
covering fossil carbon and its recycling into fuel (e.g., carbon-based
fuels). The question of whether the recycling of fossil carbon should be
rewarded in the ETS is a debatable and controversial subject. Recycling
carbon for additional use could be incentivized to promote circular
economy principles and reduce the reliance on fossil resources. On
the other hand, it may be argued that as the carbon will ultimately
be emitted in any case, rewarding this practice could undermine the
effectiveness of emissions reduction strategies. Therefore, establishing
clear guidelines for the treatment of recycled carbon within the ETS is
a key challenge that requires an in-depth policy analysis.
The next potential challenge among resources is related to re-
newable electricity supply in Germany based on the variable nature
of renewable energy sources (known as variability), e.g., wind and
solar, which can cause changes in energy availability [99]. Considering
the potential of Nordic countries for generating renewable electricity
through wind and Southern European countries through solar power,
forming further partnerships could enhance the availability of renew-
able energy and reduce the risk of volatility in supply. Within Germany,
the EEG is aiming to increase the share of renewable electricity, ex-
panding on-shore and off-shore wind, and solar power. Currently,
Germany applies the EEG feed-in tariff. Given the projected scenarios
for the adoption of PtX fuels, modifying the existing tariff or intro-
ducing a new green tariff could be advantageous for enhancing energy
security considering the high dependency of PtX production processes
on renewable electricity.
As mentioned earlier in the content analysis section, the high cost
of PtX fuels compared to fossil ones is one of the major challenges
hindering their adoption and diffusion in the transport sector. A sig-
nificant portion of the capital costs associated with PtX fuels is related
to their production facilities, encompassing electrolyzers, DAC, storage,
as well as FT, methanol, and Haber-Bosch synthesizers, providing favor-
able conditions for incentivizing the establishment of fuel production
plants to accelerate the adoption and diffusion of these fuels. However,
ambiguous fiscal policies governing PtX fuels are important obstacles to
their market ramp-up. Frequent changes in political conditions could
also undermine investment security. The identified EU fiscal policies,
such as the Hydrogen Bank and SCF, could be expanded to encompass
green hydrogen and PtX fuels. Furthermore, revising the Energy Tax-
ation Directive and CBAM could incentivize the adoption of PtX fuels.
Similarly, recognizing the potential effective role of fiscal policies in
the adoption and diffusion of PtX fuels, a part of the revenue generated
by the EU ETS could be dedicated to supporting the production of e-
kerosene and sustainable marine fuels. Prioritizing these fuels or green
hydrogen in aviation and maritime can be addressed through various
channels, including categorizing them within net-zero technologies
within the EU policies. Moreover, the SCF, Innovation Fund, and State
Aid mechanisms can serve as effective tools for reducing the costs of
PtX fuels in aviation and sustainable marine fuels.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Finally, importing PtX fuels will likely play a significant role in
meeting the targets. Considering the Global PtX Atlas [83], Germany
could re-evaluate its energy partnerships to enhance the capacities
for the import of green hydrogen and PtX fuels. Furthermore, hydro-
gen partnerships with other European countries could be intensified,
particularly given the volatility of renewable electricity generation in
Germany. Therefore, countries with an abundance of potential sites
for renewable electricity and other feedstock could play a crucial
role in meeting the future demand for PtX fuels in Germany through
imports. One of the main challenges regarding the importing of PtX
fuels is the capital investment required for transport and distribution
infrastructures. Boosting infrastructural support through the AFIR and
the Trans-European Transport Network will play an important role in
the adoption and use of these fuels. A significant share of Germany’s
demand for green hydrogen or PtX is expected to be met through im-
ports from other countries, many of which are located at considerable
distances. Hence, sustainability optimized imports are essential. A new
and revised version of the FTIP can help address the gaps in current
infrastructural capacities. The specific design and implementation of
such revisions and changes mandate sound in-depth analyses.
5.3. Limitations & future directions
While there is an increasing body of research on policies aimed
at sustainable transition in the EU transport sector, many questions
remain. Although the proposed approach for policy review and analysis
helped us explore the current regulatory framework and understand
the dynamics influencing PtX fuels in the transport sector, several
limitations were identified.
The main focus of this study is the comprehensive selection, review,
and analysis of policies across various sectors with direct and indirect
effects on PtX fuels. As discussed in the previous two sections, policies
governing water and carbon for producing PtX fuels are highly relevant
to policy analysis, particularly in terms of assessing policy coherence
within a cross-sectoral framework. In February 2024, the EU introduced
the Industrial Carbon Management Strategy as a comprehensive ap-
proach for scaling up carbon management. The proposed strategy holds
significant potential for facilitating the transition of the transport sector
by not only tackling emissions from fossil fuels but also leveraging
stored carbon resources to produce PtX fuels. This is accomplished
through the support and development of DAC infrastructures, as well
as securing carbon supply from various sources. On the other hand,
no strategy or initiative is considered for regulating water sources for
green hydrogen production. Therefore, potential trade-offs (conflicts
and synergies) can be identified by examining the existing policies
within the policy analysis framework.
Currently, several countries in the EU and around the world have
developed their national strategies for supporting the deployment of
hydrogen projects. Considering the need for energy and hydrogen part-
nerships to meet Germany’s high hydrogen demand, a policy analysis
can be conducted on various hydrogen strategies to identify conflicts
and synergies between Germany’s targets and those of other countries.
The same applies to analyzing federal strategies within Germany in
order to understand regulatory directions across different federal states,
future targets, the potential for producing renewable electricity, and
the possibility of partnership between federal states, such as the Joint
Hydrogen Strategy in Northern Germany.
From a methodological perspective, this study took a mixed-method
qualitative approach, which includes analyzing policy documents using
a framework developed from a coding scheme and a content analysis.
This approach yields valuable insights into policy review and analysis,
conflicts, synergies, and insufficiency in the regulatory framework ded-
icated to the promotion of PtX fuels. Two key limitations in this context
are the lack of qualitative or quantitative policy coherence analysis
and policy impact assessment, as well as the absence of prospective
modeling of their value chain using predictive policy generation tools.In future studies, the design and implementation of subsidies and
incentives for the adoption and diffusion of PtX fuels could be further
examined. In another direction, a policy coherence analysis could be
conducted to investigate the nexus of renewable electricity, carbon
capture and storage, biomass feedstock, and water systems in terms
of regulatory frameworks to support the production and use of PtX
fuels. Another study may be conducted to examine the environmental
and economic impacts of PtX fuels in aviation and maritime transport
under different policy scenarios. Finally, the impacts of different blend
mandates can be studied to understand potential consumption of PtX
fuels in aviation and maritime transport.
6. Conclusions
The EU’s targets for reducing GHG emissions by 55% by 2030 and
achieving climate neutrality by 2050 have been mirrored in Germany’s
national climate goals, which aim for a 65% reduction in emissions
by 2030 and climate neutrality by 2045. The transport sector, both
in Germany and the EU, has failed previous emission reduction mile-
stones, staying at the same emission levels in most cases. Despite
the predominant electrification policies, there exist parts of transport,
such as aviation and maritime, that are difficult to electrify. In this
regard, PtX fuels are promising solutions that have shown potential
for addressing GHG emissions. With numerous production plants and
projects, Germany is one of the leading countries in the EU in the
production of PtX fuels. Currently, PtX fuels in Germany are regulated
by the EU’s RED III, REFuelEU Aviation, and FuelEU Maritime, as well
as the GHG reduction quota (37. BImSchV), Germany’s PtL roadmap,
national and federal hydrogen strategies, and industrial roadmaps.
In summary, the overall findings indicate complex and cross-sectoral
policies with direct and indirect effects on PtX fuels. Through the
identified policies, policy content analysis reveals specific qualitative
and quantitative targets that govern future projections for PtX fuels.
Using the developed coding scheme, policy analysis also reveals useful
insights into the role of different resources as well as market adoption
and diffusion processes. In this regard, the main findings are as follows:
•A high coherence was identified between policies dealing with
generating renewable electricity in the EU and Germany, indi-
cating a unified approach towards increasing renewable energy
capacity. However, low coherence exists between policies ad-
dressing PtX fuels, such as the ReFuelEU Aviation, and those
addressing renewable electricity generation. Considering the key
role of renewable electricity for PtX production and their lev-
elized costs, the low coherence suggests potential barriers to
the effective integration of PtX technologies into the broader
energy system. This results in limited support for incentivizing
the development and adoption of PtX fuels, as most relevant
policies currently concentrate on defining quotas rather than
implementing essential financial instruments.
•A similar shortcoming is also evident in policies that have the
potential to address the utilization of DAC for PtX production. Ac-
cording to the results of the content analysis and policy analysis,
carbon remains as one of the key resources for PtX fuels with an
unclear regulatory framework. Considering the long technological
maturity of DAC, carbon from point sources as well as recycled
carbon are currently favored due to their lower costs in Ger-
many. However, in the long term, the existing policy framework
needs to be reconsidered in order to regulate carbon capture and
utilization through DAC in the content of PtX fuels.
•The results of the coding scheme highlight low coherence between
policies supporting sustainable transport and those supporting
agriculture, land-use and bio-based feedstock. Taking the key role
of bio-based feedstock for PBtX fuels, such as a low coherence,
presents a significant challenge for the integration of these fu-
els into the transport sector considering their growing demand
projections.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
•High coherence is detected between policies addressing hydrogen
in Germany and the EU. Outlining ambitious goals for hydro-
gen production, infrastructure development, and utilization, the
National Hydrogen Strategy is playing a key role in mirroring
the EU’s efforts to build a strong hydrogen economy. Individual
federal states have complemented this strategy through their own
strategies or joint strategies with other federal states in order
to foster localized innovation and investment. Germany’s import
strategy as well as its energy partnerships have provided a solid
regulatory framework to secure a stable supply.
•The results indicate notable coherence between policies support-
ing R&D for green hydrogen and PtX fuels. As PtX and PBtX
fuels are in their early development and marketability stages,
policies have successfully considered various instruments in order
to support R&D projects, placing a special emphasis on hydrogen
production as a key resource in the value chain.
•Another low degree of coherence among policies is observed
between those supporting PtX fuels and fiscal policies. Unlike
the SCF that supports vulnerable individuals and businesses in
road transport, there is no specific regulatory framework to pro-
vide a similar support scheme for PtX fuels in aviation and
maritime transport. Accordingly, a similar policy should be de-
veloped to support vulnerable individuals, such as air travelers,
and businesses, including airlines and shipping companies.CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ali Ebadi Torkayesh: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original

vestigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Sandra
Venghaus: Writing - review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project
administration, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation), Germany under Germany’s Excellence Strategy -
Cluster of Excellence 2186 ‘‘The Fuel Science Center’’ - ID: 390919832.
Appendix
SeeTables A.1-A.3,Figs. A.1andA.2.
Table A.1
Identified policies and corresponding number of documents.
Policy # documents Policy # documents Policy # documents
RED III 1 Hydrogen and Decarbonized
Gas Market Package2 CBAM 1
AFIR 1 FTIP 1 EU ETS 1
EU H2 Strategy 1 Climate Action Plan 2 ESR 1
FuelEU Maritime 1 37. BImSchv 1 EED 1
ReFuelEu Aviation 1 PtL Roadmap 1 EEG 1
Germany H2 Strategy 1 Social Climate Fund 1 ETD 1
SSMS 1 REPowerEU 2 MFS 1
NZIA 1 Hydrogen Bank 1 EU CAP 1
LULUCF 1
Table A.2
An overview of PtX plants in Germany [88].
Plant name Location Year Capacity
(MW)Product Plant Name Location Year Capacity
(MW)Product
Aqua Ventus Nordsee,
Doggerbank2035 10 000 H2 Grünes Methanol
ErlangenErlangen 2019 - Synthetic
hydrocarbons,
MeOH
Green
WilhelmshavenWilhelmshaven 2030 410 H2 Elektrolyse
Windpark EllhöftEllhöft 2019 - H2
H2morrow Duisburg 2030 1400 H2 bioCO2nvert Dörentrup 2019 0.1 -
Elektrolyseur für
MeerwasserBremerhaven 2030 1 H2 STORE&GO Falkenhagen 2018 1 CH4
HH2E Lubmin 2030 Lubmin 2030 900 H2 eFarm Bosbüll 2018 0.5 H2
HH2E Borna 2030 Thierbach 2030 900 H2 AsH2Gas Weilheim-
Schongau2018 0.3 CH4
AquaSector Deutsche Bucht 2028 290 H2 eFarm Reußenköge 2018 0.2 H2
Wilhelmshaven
Green Energy HubWilhelmshaven 2028 500 H2 eFarm Dörpum 2018 0.2 H2
Jangada Jänschwalde 2028 123 H2 C3-Mobility (Closed
Carbon Cycle)Freiberg 2018 - Synthetic
hydrocarbons
Elektrolyseanlage
YARA Brunsbüttel
GmbH 1Brunsbüttel 2027 250 NH3 Methanolsynthese
(E2Fuel)Haßfurt 2018 - Synthetic
hydrocarbons,
MeOH
Elektrolyseanlage
YARA Brunsbüttel
GmbH 2Brunsbüttel 2027 250 NH3 H&R Ölwerke
SchindlerHamburg-
Neuhof2017 5 H2
HydroHub Fenne Völklingen 2027 52.5 H2, O2 Carbon2Chem Duisburg 2017 2 H2, chemicals
Lingen Green
Hydrogen (Green
Refinery)Lingen 2027 500 H2 INFINITY I Pfaffenhofen 2017 1 CH4
doing Hydrogen
PrignitzPrignitz 2027 - H2 eFarm Langenhorn 2017 0.2 H2
(continued on next page)Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table A.2(continued ).
HydrOxy Hub
WalsumDuisburg 2027 520 H2 sunfire
Power-to-Liquids
(Phase 1)Dresden 2017 0.1 Synthetic
hydrocarbons, crude
oil
Eletrolysekorridor
OstdeutschlandRostock 2026 210 H2 ORBIT 1st site Regensburg 2017 - CH4
GreenHydroChem Leuna 2026 100 H2 Wasserstofftankstelle
KarlsruheKarlsruhe 2017 - H2
HyTechHafen (doing
hydrogen)Rostock 2026 100 H2 ORBIT 2nd site Ibbenbüren 2017 - CH4
Clean Hydrogen
Coastline (IPCEI)Emden 2026 300 H2 Tankstelle Fürholzen
WestFürholzen 2017 - H2
Hamburg Green
Hydrogen Hub
(HGHH)Hamburg-
Moorburg2026 100 H2 greenfuel Essen 2017 - Synthetic
hydrocarbons,
MeOH
HyKero Böhlen-
Lippendorf2026 86.5 Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
keroseneWindGas Haßfurt Haßfurt 2016 1.3 H2
Clean Hydrogen
Coastline (IPCEI)Bremen 2026 50 H2 BioPower2Gas-
ErweiterungAllendorf
(Eder)2016 1.2 CH4
HySCALE100 Dithmarschen 2026 500 H2 H2ORIZON Lampold-
shausen2016 1 H2
Lingen Green
Hydrogen (Green
Refinery)Lingen 2025 100 H2 Wasserstofftankstelle
Stuttgart TalstraßeStuttgart 2016 0.4 H2
Get H2
(Erweiterung)Lingen 2025 100 H2 Power to Mobility
AltenstadtAltenstadt 2016 0.3 CH4
HySynGas Brunsbüttel 2025 50 H2, CH4 HPEM2GAS Emden 2016 0.2 -
Westküste 100 Hemmingstedt 2025 670 H2, synthetic
hydrocar-
bons,
benzeneLaborreaktor am
Fraunhofer IWESKassel 2016 0.1 H2
Aqua Primus 2 Helgoland 2025 28 H2 Direkt-
methanisierung von
BiogasBad Hersfeld 2016 0.1 CH4
RHYME Bavaria Burghausen 2025 20 H2, MeOH bioCONNECT Lemgo 2016 - CH4
Referenzkraftwerk
Lausitz (RefLau)
Phase ISpremberg 2025 10 H2 Energiepark Mainz Mainz 2015 6 H2
H2-Wyhlen Grenzach-
Wyhlen2025 5 H2 Energiepark
Pirmasens-WinzelnPirmasens 2015 2.5 CH4
Hy4Chem Ludwigshafen 2025 54 H2 Power-to-Gas-
PilotanlageHamburg-
Reitbrook2015 1.5 H2
HH2E Borna Thierbach 2025 100 H2 Hamburg -
SchnackenburgalleeHamburg 2015 0.2 H2
HH2E Lubmin Lubmin 2025 - H2 Power-2-Hydrogen-
TankstelleHamburg 2015 0.2 H2
GreenMotionSteel Duisburg 2024 120 H2 GrInHy Salzgitter 2015 0.1 H2
Get H2 Lingen 2024 100 H2 Smart Grid Solar Arzberg 2015 0.1 H2
GreenHydroChem Bad Lauchstädt 2024 30 H2 localhy Sonneberg 2015 0.1 H2
Energiepark
WunsiedelWunsiedel 2024 8.8 H2 Exytron Zero-
Emission-WohnparkAlzey 2015 0.1 CH4
Wasserelektrolyse
Windpark KremsdorfGöhl 2024 4 H2 Power-to-Fuel-
Anlage LünenLünen 2015 - Synthetic
hydrocarbons,
MeOH
Power-to-Gas-Anlage
MetelenMetelen 2024 20 - GICON-
GroßtechnikumCottbus 2015 - CH4
Green MeOH Stade 2024 - MeOH MEFCO2 Niederaußem 2014 1 Synthetic
hydrocarbons,
MeOH
H2NORD Emden 2024 50 H2 Energy Lab 2.0 Karlsruhe 2014 0.3 H2, CH4
H2art of Lower
SaxonySteyerberg 2024 - H2 Biogasbooster Straubing 2014 0.3 CH4
Bosch SOEC Stuttgart 2024 1 H2 HELMETH Karlsruhe 2014 <0.1 CH4
HyBit Bremen Bremen 2024 10 H2 PtG
Berlin-SchönebergBerlin 2014 <0.1 H2
Green Motion Steel Duisburg 2024 120 H2 Forschungsanlage
der
DVGW-Forsch.-stelle
am EBIKarlsruhe 2014 - CH4
Elektrolysetest- und
-versuchsplattform
Leuna (ELP)Leuna 2023 24 H2 Audi e-gas Werlte 2013 6 CH4
HY.Waiblingen Waiblingen 2023 2 H2 PtG-Etzel Etzel 2013 6 H2
HY.City Bremerhaven 2023 2 H2 WindGas
FalkenhagenFalkenhagen 2013 2 H2
Hydrogen Lab
BremerhavenBremerhaven 2023 2 H2 RH2-WKA Grapzow 2013 1 H2
(continued on next page)Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table A.2(continued ).
Energiewende im
Kleinen (EwiK)Großräschen 2023 - H2 PtG-Emden Emden 2013 0.3 CH4
Hy2B Pfeffenhausen Pfeffenhausen 2023 5 H2 CO2RRECT Niederaußem 2013 0.3 CH4, chemicals
SeWAGE PLANT H Hannover 2023 17 H2, O2 BioPower2Gas Allendorf
(Eder)2013 0.3 CH4
H2Move Cuxhafen 2023 2 H2 Mikrobielle
MethanisierungSchwandorf 2013 0.3 CH4
KRUH2 Krummhörn 2023 1 H2 Stromlückenfüller 1 Reußenköge 2013 0.2 H2
Reverion-Anlage Nr.
1Waldmünchen 2023 0.3 H2 designetz
Pilotanlage
IbbenbürenIbbenbüren 2013 0.1 H2
MariSynFuel Bremerhaven 2023 - MeOH Kommunaler
Energieverbund
FreiburgFreiburg 2013 0.1 H2
Hydrogen Lab
BremerhavenBremerhaven 2023 2 H2 WindGas Hamburg Hamburg 2012 1 H2
AEM Multicore
BioenergieparkSaerbeck 2023 1 H2 H2BER Multi-
Energie-TankstelleBerlin 2012 0.5 H2
bioFarm Straubing 2023 0.1 CH4 P2G-Elektrolyse zur
AEL-ErforschungStuttgart 2012 0.4 H2
AWG Wuppertal Wuppertal 2023 2 H2 Thüga Strom zu Gas
PlattformFrankfurt 2012 0.3 H2
REFHYNE 2 Wesseling 2023 100 H2 PtG am Eucolino Schwandorf 2012 0.1 CH4
RWE
Elektrolysetestanlage
LingenLingen 2022 14 H2 Methanisierung am
Eichhof,
SolarFuel-Alpha 4th
siteBad Hersfeld 2012 <0.1 CH4
CEC Haren Haren 2022 2 H2 Windgas Haurup Haurup 2011 1 H2
Hensoldt Green
BuildingKiel 2022 <0.1 H2 REG-Technikum Stuttgart 2011 0.3 CH4
GrinHy 2.0 Salzgitter 2022 0.7 H2 H2Herten Herten 2011 0.2 H2
Green Hydrogen
HubLeuna 2022 100 H2 DemoSNG
(follow-up plant,
2nd site)Karlsruhe 2011 <0.1 CH4
Energiepark Zerbst Zerbst 2022 - H2 H2-Tankstelle
HafenCityHamburg 2010 1 H2
Green Hydrogen @
Blue DanubeErlangen 2022 - H2 H2
Forschungszentrum
CottbusCottbus 2010 0.1 H2
Green Electrolyzer Frankfurt 2022 5 H2 H2Move Freiburg 2010 <0.1 H2
REFHYNE Wesseling 2021 10 H2 SolarFuel-Alpha 3rd
siteMorbach 2010 <0.1 CH4
WindH2 Salzgitter 2021 2.5 H2 SolarFuel-Alpha 2nd
siteWerlte 2009 <0.1 CH4
Fairfuels Atmosfair Werlte 2021 1.3 Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
keroseneSolarFuel-Alpha 1st
siteStuttgart 2008 <0.1 CH4
Green Hydrogen
EsslingenEsslingen 2021 1 H2 EXYTRON Demon-
strationsanlageRostock 2008 <0.1 CH4
E-CO2MET
Raffinerie
MitteldeutschlandLeuna 2021 0.7 Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
MeOHHyFLEET:CUTE Hamburg 2006 0.4 H2
Fuel Cell Microgrid Friedrichshafen 2021 0.3 H2 HyWindBalance Oldenburg 2006 <0.1 H2
Elektrolyseur
HuntorfHuntorf 2020 <0.1 H2 Test-Elektrolyseur
SolviCoreHanau 2006 - H2
sunfire
Power-to-Liquids
(Phase 2)Dresden 2020 0.2 Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
crude oilHybridkraftwerk
PrenzlauPrenzlau 2005 0.5 H2
Stromlückenfüller
2nd phaseReußenköge 2020 0.2 H2 Demonstrationsan-
lage HanauHanau 2005 <0.1 H2
Nachhaltige
Energieversorgung
für Bestands-und
Neubauten im
Natur-und
Freizeitgebiet
BernsteinseeSassenburg
Stüde2020 0.1 CH4 n.n. (FH Stralsund) Stralsund 2005 <0.1 H2
PtG-MSE Duisburg 2020 0.1 H2 PHOEBUS Jülich 1993 <0.1 H2
FlexMethanol
AnlageStralsund 2020 - Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
MeOHSolar-Wasserstoff-
ProjektNeunburg
vorm Wald1986 0.3 H2
Nachhaltige
Energieversorgung
am BernsteinSeeBernsteinsee 2020 - CH4 E-Fuels/Grünes
Methanol vivevo
energy GmbHBrunsbüttel - 60 H2
Reallabor Westküste
100Lägerdorf 2020 30 H2, O2 CCU P2C Salzbergen Salzbergen - - CH4, chemicals,
synthetic
hydrocarbons
(continued on next page)Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table A.2(continued ).
Wind to Gas
BrunsbüttelBrunsbüttel 2019 2.4 H2 KEROSyN100 Hemmingstedt - - Synthetic
hydrocarbons
PtG-Anlage
Grenzach-WyhlenGrenzach-
Wyhlen2019 5 H2 Demonstrationsan-
lage des
PtX-
KompetenzzentrumsCottbus - - Synthetic
hydrocarbons
Kopernikus 2.0 Karlsruhe 2019 0.3 Synthetic
hydrocarbonsCHESS Huntorf - 30 H2
HYPOS: rSOC Frankfurt am
Main2019 0.2 H2 ChemCH2ange Köln - 100 H2, MeOH, NH3
Klimafreundliches
Wohnen in
AugsburgAugsburg 2019 0.1 H2, CH4 Grüner Wasserstoff
für grünen Stahl
DuisburgDuisburg - - H2
Kopernikus 1.0 Karlsruhe 2019 <0.1 Synthetic
hydrocarbonsH2goesRail Tübingen - - H2, NH3
PtM - Miniplant Freiburg 2019 - Synthetic hy-
drocarbons,
MeOHBayH2 Vohburg - 128 H2
Table A.3
R&D projects and plants for PtL fuels [77,86].
Plants & Projects Federal State Remarks Plants & Projects Federal State Remarks
eFuels-
Kraftstoffe neu
denkenBaden-
Württemberg(1) Planning a FT plant to
produce 50,000 tons of kerosene,
diesel and naphtha per year by
2027.Kompetenzzentrum für
Klima-und Lärmschutz
im LuftverkehrHessen (1) Producing Kerosene.
(2) Organizing the market
ramp-up of PtL fuels.
Ineratec Baden-
Württemberg(1) Producing 3500 tons of
kerosene per year using the FT.
(2) Using carbon from biogas
source for the synthesis.Industriepark Hoechst Hessen (1) Acting as an innovation hub
for sustainable fuels and
chemicals.
(2) Planning a plant for PBtL
fuels.
(3) Practical testing of PtL
production with different
renewable electricity sources.
CI4C Baden-
Württemberg(1) Collaboration of several
cement companies on producing
OXY-fuel.Koordinierung der
Bundesländer und
Aufbau eines Dialogs
zu SAFHessen (1) Organizing the information
exchange and stakeholders
involved in the relevant projects.
Ineratec/
SCHWENKBaden-
Württemberg(1) Planning a PtL pilot plant to
produce kerosene in collaboration
with cement industry.Wasserstoff-
Leistungszentrum
NorddeutschlandMecklenburg-
Vorpommern(1) Building a 2 MW hydrogen
plant for aviation.
Projekt

Württemberg(1) Planning to produce 120,000
tons per year of kerosene for
Stuttgart airport.
(2) Using carbon from cement
industry.
(3) Production technology and
starting date are not available yet.E-Kerosin-aus-der-Luft Mecklenburg-
Vorpommern(1) Production of 750 kg/day PtL
kerosene, 405 kg/day green
naphtha and 265 kg/day green
hydrogen (274 tons per year in
general).
(2) No information is available
about the starting date and
carbon source.
KIT Baden-
Württemberg(1) Investigating pathways to use
DAC for production of PtX fuels.CCU P2C Salzbergen Lower Saxony (1) Extraction of carbon from
local waste for production of PtL
fuels and PtC using green
hydrogen.
Viridi RE GmbH Baden-
Württemberg(1) Transporting renewable power
and green hydrogen from Spain
to produce PtL fuels.DOW Stade - Green
MeOHLower Saxony (1) Extraction of carbon from
exhaust gases of gas power plant.
(2) Producing 200,000 tons of
methanol per year by the
methanol synthesis.
(3) Starting date is not available
yet.
ZSW Baden-
Württemberg(1) Delivering strategic actions of
related projects, supported by the
micro- and macro-economic
insights and political
recommendations.GG2L Lower Saxony (1) Setting up a production plant
for kerosene and hydrogen (1000
liters per day) based on the FT.
TUM Bavaria (1) Developing and promoting
new technologies for
carbon-neutral fuels.CUTEC Lower Saxony (1) R&D on renewable fuels, with
a focus on PtX fuels.
OMV
BurghausenBavaria (1) Producing 20,000 tons of
kerosene, starting at the end of
2020s.
(2) No information is available on
the synthesis process and carbon
sources.Solarbelt Lower Saxony (1) Producing 360 tons of
kerosene per year by the FT.
(2) Using biomethane as a source
for carbon feedstock.
(continued on next page)Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table A.3(continued ).
Straubing Bavaria (1) Building a pilot plant for bio-
and e-fuels considering the
scalability of bio-based chemicals.PtL Shell North Rhine-Westphalia (1) Feasibility analysis of PtL
production (kerosene) for
aviation.
(2) Clarification of regulatory
framework and economic viability
of PtL production.
(3) Potential production of
kerosene by 100,000 tons per
year starting from 2025.
Hy2Lausitz Bavaria (1) Producing green hydrogen,
PtX, and green methanol fuel
with a capacity of70 + 5MW.DLR-Institut Future
FuelsNorth Rhine-Westphalia (1) Analyzing economic
efficiency, performance, security
of supply and social acceptance
of PtL fuels.
PtX Lab Lausitz Bavaria (1) Locating a PtL demonstration
system through involving
potential stakeholders.
(2) Producing 10,000 tons of
kerosene per year by the FT.
(3) Using carbon from biogenic
sources or DAC.Center for Vertical
MobilityNorth Rhine-Westphalia (1) R&D on projects to use wind
power and hydrogen to produce
PtL fuels.
HyEast Bavaria (1) Construction of a 50 MW
electrolysis facility and
production and use of green
hydrogen for kerosene.DAWN North Rhine-Westphalia (1) Producing 3500 tons of
kerosene per year by the FT.
(2) Starting point is not agreed
on yet.
(3) Carbon is supposed to be
produced from sun-to-liquid
process.
EWiK Bavaria (1) Demonstration and research
of decentralized PtX fuels
production for aviation and
maritime transport.Elektrolyseanlage für
Wasserstoff aus
regenerativen EnergienRhineland-Palatinate (1) Using hydrogen to produce
Kerosene.
GG2L Bavaria (1) Producing carbon-neutral fuels
for aviation.Speyer Rhineland-Palatinate (1) Planning annual production of
60,000 tons of renewable
hydrocarbons, advanced biofuels
and SAF from sugary agricultural
residues.
KEROSyN100 Bremen (1) Developing a kerosene plant
based on the methanol synthesis.EDL Anlagenbau GmbH Saxony (1) Planning to build a PtL plant
to produce 42,000 tons per year
by 2025 (kerosene), 11,000 tons
of naphtha, 1500 tons of green
hydrogen.
(2) Planning to build a PtL plant
to produce 750 kg/day kerosene.
Bremerhaven Bremen (1) Construction of an electrolysis
plant.
(2) Testing the implementation of
PtL processes.Sunfire GmbH Saxony (1) Building plants to produce
capacities of up to 10 million
liters of PtX fuels per year in
Norway, France and Germany and
another in the medium term
scaling level up to 100 million
liters per year.
‘‘BLANCAIR to X
- Kraftstoffe aus
Wasser & Luft’’Hamburg (1) Producing PtX fuels using
carbon form DAC.Fraunhofer-Institut für
Keramische
Technologien und
SystemeSaxony (1) R&D on green ammonia.
NextGate Hamburg (1) Producing 200 tons of PtX
fuels per year using the FT.
(1) Using biogenic sources for
supplying carbon feedstock.TU Bergakademie
FreibergSaxony (1) Production of kerosene for
Leipzig airport.
(2) Thermo-chemical use of waste
to produce kerosene for aviation.
Jangada Brandenburg (1) Producing 34,000 tons of
kerosene per year using the FT,
starting from 2027.
(2) Using biogenic sources for
carbon in the FT.Hykero Saxony (1) Producing 42,000 tons of
kerosene per year using the FT,
starting from 20206.
(2) Using point source carbon
from biomethane for the FT.
Concrete
ChemicalsBrandenburg (1) Producing 30,000 tons of
kerosene per year starting from
2028 using the FT.
(2) Carbon from cement industry
will be supplied.Green Fuels Lausitz Saxony (1) Producing 200,000 tons of
methanol and kerosene per year
using the FT and methanol.
(2) Starting date is not
determined.
(3) Waste recycling will be used
as the main source for carbon.
(continued on next page)Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Table A.3(continued ).
Elektrolysetest-
und -
versuchsplatt-
form ELPSachsen-Anhalt (1) Planning a pilot plant for
production of green hydrogen.Raffinerie Heide Schleswig-Holstein (1) Using offshore wind power
for producing 600 tons of
kerosene per year using the
methanol synthesis.
(2) Using point source carbon
from cement industry for the
methanol synthesis.
(3) Expanding the production to
20,000 tons per year by 2027.
Technologie-
PlattformSachsen-Anhalt (1) Producing 10,000 tons of
kerosene and methanol per year,
starting from 2024.
(2) Production technologies will
vary between the FT and
methanol.
(3) No information is available on
carbon source.
Fig. A.1. Schematic of PtX fuels value chain.
Fig. A.2. Timeline of Hydrogen-related strategies in the federal states.Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1]Jakučionyt ̇e-Skodien ̇e M, Krikštolaitis R, Liobikien ̇e G. The contribution of
changes in climate-friendly behaviour, climate change concern and personal
responsibility to household greenhouse gas emissions: Heating/cooling and
transport activities in the European Union. Energy 2022;246:123387.
[2]Berrang-Ford L, Ford JD, Paterson J. Are we adapting to climate change? Glob
Environ Change 2011;21(1):25-33.
[3]Lümmen N, Røstbø EV. Biowaste to hydrogen or Fischer-Tropsch fuels by
gasification-a Gibbs energy minimisation study for finding carbon capture
potential and fossil carbon displacement on the road. Energy 2020;211:118996.
[4]Monasterolo I, Raberto M. The impact of phasing out fossil fuel subsidies on the
low-carbon transition. Energy Policy 2019;124:355-70.
[5]Panarello D, Gatto A. Decarbonising Europe-EU citizens’ perception of re-
newable energy transition amidst the European Green Deal. Energy Policy
2023;172:113272.
[6]Wang Z, Yen-Ku K, Li Z, An NB, Abdul-Samad Z. The transition of renewable
energy and ecological sustainability through environmental policy stringency:
Estimations from advance panel estimators. Renew Energy 2022;188:70-80.
[7]European Commission. European green deal - Delivering on our targets.
Publications Office of the European Union; 2021, 
373022 .
[8]European Commission. ‘Fit for 55’: delivering the EU’s 2030 climate target on
the way to climate neutrality. In: Communication from the commission to the
European parliament, the European council, the council, the European economic
and social committee and the committee of the regions. Brussels, Belgium:
European Commission; 2021.
[9]EEA. Greenhouse gas emissions. 2023, 
maps/data/data-viewers/greenhouse-gases-viewer/ .
[10] Umweltbundesamt. Greenhouse gas emissions. 2022, 
umweltbundesamt.de/en/data/environmental-indicators/indicator-greenhouse-
gas-emissions#at-a-glance/ .
[11] Rosendal MB, Münster M, Bramstoft R. Renewable fuel production and the
impact of hydrogen infrastructure-A case study of the Nordics. Energy
2024;131234.
[12] Hansen K, Mathiesen BV, Skov IR. Full energy system transition towards
100% renewable energy in Germany in 2050. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2019;102:1-13.
[13] Hake J-F, Fischer W, Venghaus S, Weckenbrock C. The German Energiewende-
history and status quo. Energy 2015;92:532-46.
[14] Peiseler L, Serrenho AC. How can current German and EU policies be improved
to enhance the reduction of CO2 emissions of road transport? Revising policies
on electric vehicles informed by stakeholder and technical assessments. Energy
Policy 2022;168:113124.
[15] Bellocchi S, Manno M, Noussan M, Prina MG, Vellini M. Electrification of
transport and residential heating sectors in support of renewable penetration:
Scenarios for the Italian energy system. Energy 2020;196:117062.
[16] Ruhnau O, Bannik S, Otten S, Praktiknjo A, Robinius M. Direct or indirect
electrification? A review of heat generation and road transport decarbonisation
scenarios for Germany 2050. Energy 2019;166:989-99.
[17] Pastore LM, Basso GL, Ricciardi G, de Santoli L. Smart energy systems for
renewable energy communities: A comparative analysis of power-to-X strategies
for improving energy self-consumption. Energy 2023;280:128205.
[18] Torkayesh AE, Venghaus S. Decoding the transport policy maze towards cli-
mate neutrality: Cross-sectoral policy landscapes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2024;206:114865.
[19] Skov IR, Schneider N. Incentive structures for power-to-X and e-fuel pathways
for transport in EU and member states. Energy Policy 2022;168:113121.
[20] Sterner M, Specht M. Power-to-gas and power-to-X-The history and results of
developing a new storage concept. Energies 2021;14(20):6594.
[21] Decourt B. Weaknesses and drivers for power-to-X diffusion in Europe. In-
sights from technological innovation system analysis. Int J Hydrog Energy
2019;44(33):17411-30.
[22] Chehade Z, Mansilla C, Lucchese P, Hilliard S, Proost J. Review and analysis
of demonstration projects on power-to-X pathways in the world. Int J Hydrog
Energy 2019;44(51):27637-55.
[23] Wulf C, Zapp P, Schreiber A. Review of power-to-X demonstration projects in
Europe. Front Energy Res 2020;8:191.
[24] Skov IR, Schneider N, Schweiger G, Schöggl J-P, Posch A. Power-to-X in Den-
mark: an analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. Energies
2021;14(4):913.
[25] Edwards RL, Font-Palma C, Howe J. The status of hydrogen technologies in the
UK: A multi-disciplinary review. Sustain Energy Technol Assess 2021;43:100901.[26] Saccani C, Pellegrini M, Guzzini A. Analysis of the existing barriers for the market
development of power to hydrogen (P2H) in Italy. Energies 2020;13(18):4835.
[27] Lim JY, Safder U, How BS, Ifaei P, Yoo CK. Nationwide sustainable renewable
energy and Power-to-X deployment planning in South Korea assisted with
forecasting model. Appl Energy 2021;283:116302.
[28] Schnuelle C, Thoeming J, Wassermann T, Thier P, von Gleich A, Goessling-
Reisemann S. Socio-technical-economic assessment of power-to-X: Potentials and
limitations for an integration into the German energy system. Energy Res Soc
Sci 2019;51:187-97.
[29] Incer-Valverde J, Patiño-Arévalo LJ, Tsatsaronis G, Morosuk T. Hydrogen-driven
Power-to-X: State of the art and multicriteria evaluation of a study case. Energy
Convers Manage 2022;266:115814.
[30] Clark II WW, Rifkin J. A green hydrogen economy. Energy Policy
2006;34(17):2630-9.
[31] Galimova T, Satymov R, Keiner D, Breyer C. Sustainable energy transition of
Greenland and its prospects as a potential Arctic e-fuel and e-chemical export
hub for Europe and East Asia. Energy 2024;286:129605.
[32] Götz M, Lefebvre J, Mörs F, Koch AM, Graf F, Bajohr S, Reimert R, Kolb T.
Renewable Power-to-Gas: A technological and economic review. Renew Energy
2016;85:1371-90.
[33] Thema M, Bauer F, Sterner M. Power-to-Gas: Electrolysis and methanation status
review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2019;112:775-87.
[34] Drünert S, Neuling U, Zitscher T, Kaltschmitt M. Power-to-Liquid fuels for
aviation-Processes, resources and supply potential under German conditions.
Appl Energy 2020;277:115578.
[35] Zhao J, Yu Y, Ren H, Makowski M, Granat J, Nahorski Z, Ma T. How the power-
to-liquid technology can contribute to reaching carbon neutrality of the China’s
transportation sector? Energy 2022;261:125058.
[36] Varone A, Ferrari M. Power to liquid and power to gas: An option for the German
Energiewende. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2015;45:207-18.
[37] Tiwari S, Singh JG, Garg A. A static robust energy management approach for
modelling low emission multi-vectored energy hub including emission markets
and power-to-gas units. Energy 2024;130827.
[38] Ueckerdt F, Bauer C, Dirnaichner A, Everall J, Sacchi R, Luderer G. Potential
and risks of hydrogen-based e-fuels in climate change mitigation. Nature Clim
Change 2021;11(5):384-93.
[39] Ballal V, Cavalett O, Cherubini F, Watanabe MDB. Climate change impacts of
e-fuels for aviation in Europe under present-day conditions and future policy
scenarios. Fuel 2023;338:127316.
[40] Cames M, Böttcher H, Fuentes Hutfilter U, Wilson R. Options for multilateral
initiatives to close the global 2030 climate ambition and action gap. Policy field
synthetic e-fuels. Technical Report, Umweltbundesamt (UBA); 2021.
[41] Oyewo AS, Lopez G, ElSayed M, Galimova T, Breyer C. Power-to-X Economy:
Green e-hydrogen, e-fuels, e-chemicals, and e-materials opportunities in Africa.
Energy Rep 2024;12:2026-48.
[42] Mayring P. Qualitative inhaltsanalyse: Grundlagen und techniken. Dt.
Studien-Verlag; 1997.
[43] Hecker S, Wicke N, Haklay M, Bonn A. How does policy conceptualise citizen
science? A qualitative content analysis of international policy documents. Citiz
Sci: Theory Pract 2019;4(1).
[44] Hall DM, Steiner R. Policy content analysis: Qualitative method for analyzing
sub-national insect pollinator legislation. MethodsX 2020;7:100787.
[45] Burre J, Bongartz D, Brée L, Roh K, Mitsos A. Power-to-X: between elec-
tricity storage, e-production, and demand side management. Chem Ing Tech
2020;92(1-2):74-84.
[46] Ausfelder F, Wagemann K. Power-to-fuels: E-fuels as an important option for a
climate-friendly mobility of the future. Chem Ing Tech 2020;92(1-2):21-30.
[47] Hillestad M, Ostadi M, Serrano GA, Rytter E, Austbø B, Pharoah J, Burheim OS.
Improving carbon efficiency and profitability of the biomass to liquid process
with hydrogen from renewable power. Fuel 2018;234:1431-51.
[48] European Parliament. Council of the European Union Directive (EU) 2018/2001
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the
promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources. Off J Eur Union
2018;328(82):1-128.
[49] Agora Verkehrswende. E-fuels zwischen wunsch und wirklichkeit. 2023,

wunsch-und-wirklichkeit .
[50] European Federation for Transport and Environment. E-fuels for planes:
with 45 projects, is the EU on track to meet its targets? 2024,

projects-is-the-eu-on-track-to-meet-its-targets .
[51] Ridjan I, Mathiesen BV, Connolly D. Terminology used for renewable liquid and
gaseous fuels based on the conversion of electricity: a review. J Clean Prod
2016;112:3709-20.
[52] Palys MJ, Daoutidis P. Power-to-X: A review and perspective. Comput Chem Eng
2022;107948.
[53] Kuckartz U, Rädiker S. Analyzing qualitative data with MAXQDA. Springer; 2019.
[54] European Commission. Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the deployment of alternative fuels
infrastructure Text with EEA relevance. 2014, 
content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014L0094/ .Energy 313 (2024) 134020 

A.E. Torkayesh and S. Venghaus
[55] European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure, and repeal-
ing Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council. 2021,
 .
[56] European Commission. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the
use of energy from renewable sources (recast) (Text with EEA relevance).
2018, 
328.01.0082.01.ENG&toc=OJ:L:2018:328:TOC/ .
[57] European Commission. Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy
from renewable sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives
2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC (Text with EEA relevance). 2009, 
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32009L0028/ .
[58] European Commission. Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and
Directive 98/70/EC as regards the promotion of energy from renewable
sources, and repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652. 2021, https:
//
energy-council-adopts-new-rules// .
[59] European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the use of renewable and low-carbon
fuels in maritime transport and amending Directive 2009/16/EC. 2021,

maritime-initiative-provisional-agreement-to-decarbonise-the-maritime-sector// .
[60] European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air trans-
port. 2021, 
25/council-and-parliament-agree-to-decarbonise-the-aviation-sector/ .
[61] European Commission. Communication from the commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European economic and social committee and the
committee of the regions a hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe. 2020,
 .
[62] European Commission. Sustainable and smart mobility strategy. 2020, https:
//ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12438-
Sustainable-and-Smart-Mobility-Strategy_en .
[63] European Commission. Hydrogen and decarbonised gas market package.
2021, 
legislation/hydrogen-and-decarbonised-gas-market-package_en .
[64] European Commission. Net zero industry act. 2023, 
economy.ec.europa.eu/publications/net-zero-industry-act_en .
[65] European Commission. Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas
emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive
96/61/EC (Text with EEA relevance)Text with EEA relevance. 2023, 
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:02003L0087-20230605/ .
[66] European Commission. EU taxonomy for sustainable activities. 2021, https:
//ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_3662/ .
[67] European Commission. Carbon border adjustment mechanism. 2021, 
europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_3661/ .
[68] European Commission. European hydrogen bank. 2022, 
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52023DC0156&qid=
1682349760946/ .
[69] European Commission. Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). 2018,

20230511/ .
[70] European Commission. The common agricultural policy. 2021, https:
//agriculture.ec.europa.eu/common-agricultural-policy/cap-overview/cap-
glance_en/ .
[71] BMDV. The mobility and fuels strategy of the German government (MFS).
2013, 
Mobilitaets-und-Kraftstoffstrategie/mobilitaets-und-kraftstoffstrategie.html/ .
[72] BMDV. The 2030 federal transport infrastructure plan. 2016, https:
//bmdv.bund.de/SharedDocs/EN/publications/2030-federal-transport-
infrastructure-plan.pdf?__blob=publicationFile/ .
[73] Bundesamt für Justiz. Siebenunddreißigste verordnung zur durchführung
des bundes-immissionsschutzgesetzes (verordnung zur anrechnung von strom-
basierten kraftstoffen und mitverarbeiteten biogenen ölen auf die treibhaus-
gasquote) (37. BImSchV). 2017, 
37/BJNR119500017.html .[74] BMWK. The national hydrogen strategy. 2020, 
Redaktion/EN/Publikationen/Energie/the-national-hydrogen-strategy.pdf?__
blob=publicationFile&v=1/ .
[75] BMUV. Climate action plan 2050. 2016, 
climate-action-plan-2050-en/ .
[76] BMF. Immediate climate action programme for 2022. 2021, https:
//
immediate-climate-action-programme-for-2022.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=
4/.
[77] BMDV. PtL roadmap: Sustainable aviation fuel from renewable energy sources
for aviation in Germany. 2021, 
G/ptl-roadmap-englisch.pdf?__blob=publicationFile/ .
[78] NPM. Elektromobilität. Brennstoffzelle. Alternative Kraftstoffe -
Einsatzmöglichkeiten aus technologischer Sicht. 2019, 
plattform-zukunft-mobilitaet.de/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/NPM-AG-2-
Elektromobilit%C3%A4t-Brennstoffzelle-Alternative-Kraftstoffe-Einsatzm%C3%
B6glichkeiten-aus-technologischer-Sicht.pdf/ .
[79] NPM. Roadmap - Markthochläufe alternativer Antriebe und Kraftstoffe aus tech-
nologischer Perspektive. 2021, 
content/uploads/2021/04/NPM_AG2_Technologie_Roadmap.pdf/ .
[80] BMWK. National hydrogen strategy update. 2023, 
Redaktion/EN/Hydrogen/Dossiers/national-hydrogen-strategy.html .
[81] FVV. Future fuels: FVV fuels study IV. 2021, 
fileadmin/Storys/020.50_Sechs_Thesen_zur_Klimaneutralitaet_des_europaeischen_
Verkehrssektors/FVV__Future_Fuels__StudyIV_The_Transformation_of_Mobility_
_H1269_2021-10__EN.pdf .
[82] DENA. E-Fuels - The potential of electricity-based fuels for low emission
transport in the EU. 2017, 
fuels-sind-notwendig-um-eu-klimaschutzziele-des-verkehrssektors-zu-erreichen/ .
[83] Hank C, Holst M, Thelen C, Kost C, Längle S, Schaadt A, Smolinka T. Site-
specific, comparative analysis for suitable Power-to-X pathways and products
in developing and emerging countries. 2023, 
publications/studies/power-to-x-country-analyses.html .
[84] FSC. The fuel science center - adaptive conversion systems for renewable energy
and carbon sources. 2021, 
?lidx=1/ .
[85] International PtX Hub. 2024,  .
[86] PtX Lab Lausitz. 2023,  .
[87] DLR. PtL technology platform - looking to the future. 2023, 
de/en/latest/news/2023/04/ptl-technology-platform-looking-to-the-future .
[88] Schumm L, Birett F, Hofrichter A, Heusgen V, Rahim S. Wasserstoffatlas
(hydrogen map) dataset (v1.0.3). Zenodo; 2023.
[89] DENA. DENA H2-report: Wasserstoffstrategien der bundesländer. 2022, https:
//h2-dialog.info/fileadmin/dena/Publikationen/PDFs/2022/dena-H2_Nr_3.pdf .
[90] BMWK. Import Strategy for hydrogen and hydrogen derivatives. 2024,

import-strategy-hydrogen.html .
[91] BMWK. Energy and climate partnerships and energy dialogues. 2023,

policy-2.html/ .
[92] ewi. Data basis for the E.ON H2 balance sheet 2023 2nd half. 2023, https:
// .
[93] Global PtX Atlas. 2024,  .
[94] European Federation for Transport and Environment. Shipping e-fuels
observatory. 2024,  .
[95] Brynolf S, Taljegard M, Grahn M, Hansson J. Electrofuels for the transport sector:
A review of production costs. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2018;81:1887-905.
[96] VDMA. Synthetic fuels: Import impossible? 2024, 
viewer/-/v2article/render/85651355 .
[97] European Commission. Water framework directive. 2000, 
ec.europa.eu/topics/water/water-framework-directive_en .
[98] Goodwin D, Gale F, Lovell H, Beasy K, Murphy H, Schoen M. Sustainability certi-
fication for renewable hydrogen: An international survey of energy professionals.
Energy Policy 2024;192:114231.
[99] Frank C, Fiedler S, Crewell S. Balancing potential of natural variability and
extremes in photovoltaic and wind energy production for European countries.
Renew Energy 2021;163:674-84.Energy 313 (2024) 134020