Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector i
Contents | 
Transitioning the 
EU Chemical Sector
December 2025Policy levers to support viability and 
increase sustainable finance
EU Sectoral Briefings: 
#1
Disclaimer 
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the 
United Nations or the European Banking Federation concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city, or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries.
Mention of a commercial company or product in this document does not imply 
endorsement by the United Nations Environment Programme, the European Banking 
Federation, or the authors. The use of information from this document for publicity or 
advertising is not permitted. Trademark names and symbols are used in an editorial 
fashion with no intention of infringement of trademark or copyright laws.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the United Nations Environment Programme or the European Banking 
Federation. We regret any errors or omissions that may have been unwittingly made.
© Maps, photos and illustrations as specified.
Suggested citation: United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (2025): 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase 
sustainable finance. Geneva.
Cover image: unsplash.com/photos/white-and-blue-factory-under-blue-sky-during-
daytime
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance iii
Contents | AcknowledgementsAcknowledgements
Authors
Rocio Falcones (UNEP FI) 
Mia Brinkmann (UNEP FI) 
Lilly Bidenharn (UNEP FI) 
Elodie Feller (UNEP FI) 
Denisa Avermaete (EBF) 
Janis Priekulis (EBF) 
Gwen Yu
The following UNEP FI reviewers have contributed by providing valuable written feedback 
(in alphabetical order): Careen Abb, Ana Bachurova, Daniel Bouzas, Guilherme Cassaro, 
Emily Dahl, Johanna Dichtl, Peggy Lefort, Simon Messenger, Joana Pedro, Jan Raes, 
Benjamin Warr.
We would also like to acknowledge Jacqueline Alvarez and the UNEP Chemicals branch 
for their insights that helped shape the scope of this paper.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance iv
Contents | Acronyms and abbreviationsAcronyms and abbreviations
APIs Active pharmaceutical ingredients
BRS Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions
CBAM Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism
CCUS Carbon capture, utilization, and storage
CCfDs Carbon contracts for difference
CEA Circular Economy Act
CEAP Circular Economy Action Plan
cGMP Current Good Manufacturing Practice
CID Clean Industrial Deal
CISAF Clean Industrial Deal State Aid Framework
CSRD Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive
EBF European Banking Federation
ECHA European Chemical Agency
EIB European Investment Bank
ETS2 Emissions Trading System 2
GBF Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework
GFC Global Framework on Chemicals
ICT Information and communications technology
IDB Industrial Decarbonization Bank
IEA International Energy Agency
IOMC Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound Management of Chemicals
MFF Multiannual Financial Framework
PFAS Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (“forever chemicals”)
PPA Power purchase agreement
PPWR Packaging and Packaging Waste Regulation
REACH Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (Law)
SUPD Single-Use Plastics Directive
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNEP FI United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance v
ContentsContents
Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................... iii
Acronyms and abbreviations ....................................................................................... iv
Executive summary ...................................................................................................... vi
Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transition ........................ 1
1.1 Market overview ................................................................................................................ 1
1.2 Sustainability footprint .................................................................................................... 2
1.3 Mitigation potential and EU objectives ........................................................................ 3
1.4 Interdependence with other industries ........................................................................ 4
Part 2: Policies affecting the EU chemical sector ...................................................... 6
Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance ............... 8
De-risking; enhancing bankability and investment viability .................................. 10
3.1 Innovating funding mechanisms, initiatives, & tools to enhance bankability ....10
3.2 Scaling circular and resource-efficient models to enhance 
investment viability ......................................................................................................... 11
Enabling environment for the chemical sector ....................................................... 12
3.3 Enhancing data transparency and standardization for informed 
investment decisions .................................................................................................... 12
3.4 Reducing administrative burden across the value chain, especially for SMEs ... 12
Ensuring a coherent and horizontal policy approach ............................................. 13
3.5 Integrating policy frameworks for a sustainable and competitive transition ....13
3.6 Ensuring long-term policy stability to drive sustainable transformation ............ 14
3.7 Encouraging banks to engage with policymakers and clients to 
support a transition that upholds environmental safeguards .............................. 14
Part 4: Examples from interdependent sectors ......................................................... 15
Part 5: Next steps ...................................................................................................... 16
Annex 1: UNEP FI Impact Radar and Sectors Mapping ............................................ 17
Annex 2: EU and global policies and initiatives affecting the chemical sector ....... 19
Annex 3: EU funding mechanisms to help reach the objectives that are part of 
the EU’s Chemicals Strategy for Sustainability ........................................ 23
Annex 4: Stakeholders of the EU chemical sector .................................................. 24
References ................................................................................................................ 25
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance vi
Contents | Executive summaryExecutive summary 
The European Union’s chemical sector is the second-largest globally (Cefic, 2024a), 
making up the bloc’s fourth-largest manufacturing industry, underpinning critical value 
chains across sectors, and employing over a million people (European Commission, 
2025g). However, the EU chemical sector faces declining global market share, high 
energy costs, and rising sustainability pressures that limit its bankability. The sector’s 
heavy reliance on toxic substances and fossil-based feedstocks make it a major source 
of pollution and contribute 5% of EU total net greenhouse gas emissions (EEA, 2025c). 
Its transformation is essential to help address the triple planetary crisis of climate 
change, pollution, and biodiversity loss. Leveraging the EU’s highly skilled workforce 
and strong innovation capacity is necessary to accelerate the shift towards safe, 
circular, and low-carbon chemical production and to deliver climate, economic, and 
social gains, which in turn can enhance sustainability and strengthen competitiveness. 
This brief presents a landscape analysis of the sector and current and forthcoming 
policies that are relevant to its transformation. Its primary focus is to help financial 
institutions and other stakeholders understand how Europe’s chemical sector is 
developing within the sustainable transformation, including key policies affecting it. 
It also identifies practical policy levers that can help banks strengthen their role in 
financing the chemical transition. 
Three areas of focus
 ◾Part 1: The EU chemical sector: overview and role in the sustainability transition:
A market overview of the sector and its economic value, sustainability footprint, 
mitigation potential, and related EU objectives for its transformation.
 ◾Part 2: Policies affecting the EU chemical sector: 
International and regional policies including the Global Framework on Chemicals, 
the 2025 EU Chemicals Industry Package, and related policies such as the EU Clean 
Industrial Deal and Industrial Decarbonization Bank. 
 ◾Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance:
1) De-risking; enhancing bankability and investment viability; 2) Enabling environment 
for the chemical sector; and 3) Ensuring a coherent and horizontal policy approach.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance vii
Contents | Executive summaryMain takeaways
The main takeaways by focus area are highlighted in Tables ES1 and ES2 .
Table ES1: Main takeaways by focus area
The EU chemical sector: Overview and role in the sustainability transition
 ◾EU chemical industry overview: The chemical sector is central to Europe’s industrial 
competitiveness as the EU is the second-largest chemical producer globally, with a share of 
12.6% global sales in 2023 (Cefic, 2024a). It is also the fourth-largest manufacturing industry in 
the EU (European Commission, 2025g).
 ◾Sustainability footprint: At the EU level, the chemical sector remains a notable source of 
hazardous emissions despite ongoing efforts to reduce the output of pollutants, including 
water and groundwater contamination, soil degradation, microplastic accumulation, and GHG 
emissions (EEA, 2025b; Cefic, n.d.). The chemical sector in the EU will need to reduce GHG 
emissions by approximately 164 million tons from 2019 levels to reach the EU’s 2050 net-zero 
goals (Accenture, 2022).
 ◾Sustainable transformation for workforce and sector resilience: The sector employs 
~1.2 million people across roughly 29,000 companies through direct jobs and supporting 
19 million jobs across supply chains in Europe (European Commission, 2025g). Ensuring a 
sustainable transformation of the sector is therefore vital to preserve and enhance its social 
and economic contributions while aligning with environmental and social objectives.
 ◾Interconnected benefits of sector transformation: Supplying materials across other critical 
sectors from agriculture and food to healthcare, energy, consumer goods, mining, and others, 
the EU chemical sector helps shape these sectors’ environmental and human rights impacts. 
Reduction of pollution and GHG emissions can lead to economic benefits related to safety and 
health, stronger biodiversity and ecosystem services, and greater resilience to climate change 
impacts (WHO, 2025; WHO, 2017; EEA, 2022). 
Policies affecting the EU chemical sector
 ◾The Global Framework on Chemicals: Adopted under UNEP in September 2023, the Global 
Framework on Chemicals sets out five strategic objectives and 28 targets for the sound 
management of chemicals and waste and provides a shared vision for a safe, healthy, and 
sustainable future (UNEP , 2024b). It also reflects a shift in perspective towards a sector-based 
approach, while at the same time addressing the critical interdependencies between sectors 
on a systemic level. 
 ◾The Chemicals Industry Package: At the EU level, the European Commission presented 
the Chemicals Industry Package as part of its 2025 Work Program (European Commission, 
2025g). Key initiatives will include a revision of the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization 
and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) regulation; establishment of a new European 
Chemicals Agency (ECHA) Basic Regulation; establishment of a Critical Chemicals Alliance; 
implementation of policies to promote clean energy affordability and circular economy 
solutions; proposed science-based restrictions on PFAS; and integration with the EU Omnibus 
Simplification Package, among other relevant EU policies. 
 ◾Other policies affecting the EU chemical sector: The EU’s broader climate and industrial 
policy framework is set to reshape the chemicals sector by covering emissions targets, driving 
decarbonization, and advancing circularity. Key examples are the European Climate Law (2021), 
the Clean Industrial Deal (2025)-integrating measures such as the Industrial Decarbonization 
Accelerator Act (2025) and the Industrial Decarbonization Bank (2026)-the Circular Economy 
Act (2026), the Packaging and Packaging Waste Regulation (2025) and the The European Pillar 
of Social Rights Action Plan (2025 review) (European Commission).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance viii
Contents | Executive summaryPolicy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance
 ◾Chemical sector leads EU manufacturing investments: The chemical sector leads in EU27 
manufacturing investments, with nearly 18% of the total investment-and 25% of chemical 
sector investment in petrochemicals (European Commission, 2025h; Cefic, 2024a). 
 ◾Financing gaps and market challenges: Varying estimates show annual financing gaps on 
the order of tens of billions of euros (European Commission, 2025h; Accenture, 2022), in part 
attributable to structural barriers including higher cost base, weak demand, and competitive 
pressure. Inclusion of the sector in relevant indices, sustainable funds, and green bond 
issuances remains relatively low, as further explored in part 3.
 ◾Potential policy levers: The sector’s sustainability pressures, regulatory shifts, and investment 
constraints underscore the need for coordinated solutions. Table ES2 illustrates seven levers 
across three topics that have been identified through this brief as having potential to increase 
bankability of the EU chemical sector. These policy levers have the potential to unlock new 
market opportunities, strengthen risk management, and accelerate capital deployment into 
low-carbon and circular solutions. 
Table ES2: Potential policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance
Topic Policy levers
De-risking mechanisms to 
improve the bankability and 
investment viability of the 
EU chemical sector1. Innovating funding mechanisms, initiatives, and 
tools to enhance bankability.
2. Scaling circular and resource-efficient models to 
enhance investment viability.
Enhancing the enabling 
environment for the 
chemical sector to transition3. Enhancing data transparency and standardization 
for informed investment decisions. 
4. Reducing administrative burden across the value 
chain, especially for SMEs.
Ensuring a coherent and 
horizontal policy approach 
to the chemical sector 
transition and financing5. Integrating policy frameworks for a sustainable and 
competitive transition.
6. Ensuring long-term policy stability to drive 
sustainable transformation.
7. Encouraging banks to engage with policymakers 
and clients to support a transition that upholds 
environmental safeguards.
Examples and next steps
The brief includes four examples from interdependent sectors of materials recycling, 
energy, transport, and agriculture, illustrating how targeted financing instruments, 
guarantees, and blended finance structures can de-risk investments, mobilize private 
capital, and accelerate clean technologies.
The following timeline highlights some relevant upcoming EU policies that will 
influence the competitiveness, decarbonization and circularity of the chemical sector.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance ix
Contents | Executive summary
Q4 2025 Q4 2025 Q2 2026 2026+
REACH 
RegulationIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
Accelerator ActIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
BankCircular 
Economy Act
In the coming months, stakeholders should prepare for new consultations and funding 
calls tied to upcoming initiatives. The Chemicals Industry Package is expected to link 
closely with the Clean Industrial Deal and Industrial Decarbonization Bank, opening 
up opportunities for blended finance, guarantees, and de-risking tools to accelerate 
investment in low-carbon and circular chemistry. Monitoring these initiatives will be 
essential to anticipate regulatory impacts, align transition strategies, and engage early 
with the Commission’s implementation process.
About this policy brief series
This policy brief is the first in a series on EU sectoral policy, developed by UNEP 
Finance Initiative (UNEP FI) and the European Banking Federation (EBF) to strengthen 
the connection between financial institutions, policymakers, and the real economy. 
This series complements additional UNEP FI related work-such as the United Nations 
Principles for Responsible Banking (PRB) Guidance Series on Sectoral and Client 
Engagement, PRB Target Setting on Financial Health and Inclusion, Sectors Mapping , 
Impact Radar , and the Regulatory Implementation Support Programme (RISP)-by 
providing a policy-focused counterpart that helps banks understand the evolving 
EU policy landscape and identify policy levers to finance real economy transitions. 
Together, these resources aim to bridge the investment gap in relevant sectors 
and support the integration of sustainability objectives into banking strategies and 
portfolios. 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 1
Contents | Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transitionPart 1: The EU chemical sector’s 
role in the sustainability transition
1.1 Market overview 
The chemical sector is central to Europe’s industrial competitiveness as the EU is the 
second-largest chemical producer globally with a share of 12.6% global sales in 2023 
(Cefic, 2024a). 
Overview of the EU chemical sector
Major manufacturing sector 
4th largest manufacturing 
industry in the EU.
Top producing countires 
Germany, France, Italy and the 
Netherlands make up two thirds 
of EU chemical sales.
Strong employment 
1.2 million people employed 
in 2020.
Trade impact 
Chemical represents 9.3% of 
exports and 9.9% of imports (2023).
Key supplier 
Over 50% of output supports 
critical sectors.
Industry structure 
While 96% are SMEs, large firms (4%) 
generate 70% of sales.
Figure 1: Overview of the EU chemical sector
Despite being the EU’s fourth-largest manufacturing industry, the EU chemical sector 
has seen its global market share decline over the past decade (European Commission, 
2025g; Cefic, 2024a; Lorbeer and Ezekoye, 2024), with structural barriers impacting the 
sector’s ambitions around its transformation and sustainability efforts: 
 ◾Sinking profit margins due to higher feedstock costs, destocking post-Covid-19 and 
weaker demand are pushing production towards lower cost regions outside of Europe 
with less stringent environmental standards (Cefic, 2025a). 
 ◾Recent tariffs, potential trade wars, and supply chain risks create uncertainty.
 ◾Energy costs are rising, while energy return on investment is declining, due to a 
variety of factors including international conflicts.
 ◾Lack of adequate regulatory pressure, for example due to challenges in attribution 
of harm of low dose chemical cocktails, may result in lock in of hazardous processes 
(Blumenthal et.al., 2022; Kortenkamp, 2014).
 ◾Innovative approaches to circular value chains are struggling to compete with 
low-cost imports, undermining business viability and leading to market exits such as 
the closure of recycling facilities (EuRIC, 2025; S&P Global, 2025).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 2
Contents | Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transitionInnovation and investment are consequently becoming more critical to sustain the 
sector’s resilience and accelerate its sustainable transition.
With a highly skilled workforce and strong innovation capacity, the EU leads in early-
stage green technologies, including sustainable chemical processes. The challenge is to 
translate this innovation into scalable, competitive production. If successful, the sector 
can help demonstrate that clean, high-value manufacturing is viable, reinforcing the EU’s 
leadership in a sustainable industrial transformation (Cleantech for Europe, 2025).
1.2 Sustainability footprint 
The chemical sector is associated with multiple sustainability topics across the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), affecting all three interlinked issues of the triple 
planetary crisis-climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss (UNEP , 2024a)-as well 
as social sustainability. Some of the main topics are explored in further detail below.
The chemical sector is the major global source of pollution across air, water, and soil in 
the form of hazardous introduced chemicals and residual chemical emissions. It also 
accounts for 5% of total net GHG emissions. Figure 2 illustrates the different stages of 
the chemical value chain where hazardous chemicals originate, highlighting the need 
for deep transformation that addresses pollution holistically. The sector’s high energy 
intensity is driven largely by its reliance on fossil-based feedstocks, with about 50% of 
total energy input used as feedstock. Combined with the significant energy needed for 
processing, production, and supply chain logistics, this reliance makes decarbonization 
particularly challenging (IEA, 2023).
Figure 2: The chemical value chain (EEA, 2023)
Environmental impacts of the chemical sector affect human health through direct 
exposure of communities and workers on production sites; through contaminated air, 
water, and soil affecting downstream consumers; and through diminishing ecosystem 
services that are central to human health. Failure to ensure occupational safety and 
health exposes workers to hazardous conditions while weakening productivity and 
economic competitiveness (WHO, 2017). Consumers’ exposure to harmful chemicals is 
linked to cancer, reproductive harm, and endocrine disruption (EEA, 2022). Ecosystems 
provide crucial services like air purification or disease control; their degradation 
reduces these benefits (WHO, 2025). Combatting the sector’s contribution to pollution 
additionally has the potential to safe direct and indirect economic costs, for example 
caused by reduced crop yields, loss of tourism revenue, or reduced labor productivity 
(UNEP FI, 2024c). Detailed information on the UNEP FI Impact Radar showing areas and 
topics across the pillars of sustainable development as well as an extraction of the UNEP 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 3
Contents | Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transitionFI Sectors Mappings showing the positive and negative sector-impact associations 
contained within the chemicals sector can be found in Annex 1 .
At the EU level, the chemical sector remains a notable source of hazardous emissions 
despite ongoing efforts to reduce the output of pollutants (Cefic, n.d.; EEA, 2025b):
 ◾Water contamination: Only 29% of EU surface waters achieved good chemical status 
(2016-2021), mainly due to persistent pollutants like mercury and brominated flame 
retardants.
 ◾Groundwater contamination: 77% of groundwater areas met good chemical 
standards (2016-2021), leaving 23% in poor condition due to ongoing contamination.
 ◾Soil degradation: Use of synthetic chemicals continues to degrade soil health, with 
residues of banned pesticides and persistent organic pollutants still detected.
 ◾Microplastic accumulation: Between 31,000 and 42,000 tonnes of microplastics 
accumulate annually in EU farmland soils, largely through sewage sludge application.
 ◾GHG emissions: Despite recent decoupling trends, the chemical sector accounts for 
5% of the EU’s GHG emissions. 
Ensuring a sustainable transformation of the sector is vital to preserve and enhance 
its social and economic contributions while aligning with environmental and social 
objectives. 
1.3 Mitigation potential and EU objectives
Transforming chemical production in response to the sector’s environmental and 
health challenges offers interconnected benefits. For example, the removal of toxic 
chemicals from plastics has been estimated to also result in economic benefits of 
around USD 2.0 trillion by avoiding associated deaths (Cropper et.al., 2024). Cleaner and 
circular production further protects biodiversity and ecosystem services, strengthening 
resilience to climate change and contributing to long-term food and water security. 
Renewable energy can lower costs and enhance energy security by facilitating 
independence from geopolitical conflicts, which can help boost the competitiveness of 
the EU chemical sector. 
The sector is enhancing product, process, and ecosystem innovation to alleviate 
some of the associated challenges, with a particular emphasis on feedstock sourcing 
and advances in circularity (Yankovitz et al., 2024). Examples of innovation include 
developing products based on renewable feedstocks, making production processes 
cleaner through more advanced technologies, and helping minimize harm to ecosystems 
by implementing improved recycling practices. The chemical sector in the EU will need 
to reduce GHG emissions by approximately 164 million tons from 2019 levels to reach 
the EU’s 2050 net-zero goals (Accenture, 2022). Some initial progress in decoupling 
emissions from increased output has been demonstrated, keeping emissions at a 
relatively stable level since 2015 (Cefic, 2024a; EEA, 2025c). Carbon capture, utilization, 
and storage (CCUS) offers one opportunity to mitigate hard-to-abate CO2 emissions 
in the future. However, the technology faces some limitations and uncertainties in its 
commercial readiness, scalability, infrastructure, and long-term viability (Cefic, 2024b). 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 4
Contents | Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transitionSystemic interventions-such as circularity strategies, material substitution, demand 
reduction, and increased product-use efficiency-are most essential to drive the 
chemical sector’s sustainable transformation.
The EU has set specific objectives for different parts of the chemical sector to guide 
its transition. Situated within the EU Green Deal, the EU Chemicals Strategy for 
Sustainability sets out a dual objective to 1) better protect citizens and the environment 
from the impacts of the chemical sector and 2) boost innovation for safe and 
sustainable chemicals to enhance the EU’s competitiveness (European Commission, 
2020). In parallel, the sector is undertaking a “twin transition”, both green and digital. 
The Commission’s Transition Pathway highlights the sector’s role in a circular economy, 
from designing safe and sustainable chemicals to advancing recyclable material cycles 
and recycling infrastructure (European Commission, 2023b). Digitalization, through tools 
like product passports and shared data platforms, is understood as key to transparency, 
traceability, and efficiency. In addition, the EU’s new Climate Law-aligned sectoral 
decarbonization pathways offer quantitative guidance for aligning industry strategies 
with the EU’s 2050 climate-neutrality objective, including three pathways directly 
addressing chemical subsectors and several pathways addressing interdependent 
subsectors (European Commission, 2025f).
1.4 Interdependence with other industries 
The EU chemical sector supplies essential materials and products across other critical 
sectors, shaping these industries’ environmental impacts. Strong interdependencies also 
have an effect on the protection of human rights within the chemical sector and its value 
chains. While there are duties to respect environmental protection and human rights 
throughout a company’s value chain, interdependencies with other sectors complicate 
the ability to identify, prevent, and address risks, making it essential to understand 
these mutual reliances (see Table 1 for a consolidated overview of key sectoral 
interdependencies). 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 5
Contents | Part 1: The EU chemical sector’s role in the sustainability transitionTable 1: Key interdependencies between the chemical sector and other critical sectors
SectorChemical sector 
contributionsKey interdependencies
Agriculture 
& foodFertilizers, pesticides, crop 
protection products, food 
preservatives, packaging, 
plasticsIn conventional agricultural practices, 
agrochemicals are heavily used, aiming for 
increased yields, food security, and pest control; 
precision agri-inputs, bio stimulants, circular 
and regenerative practices and regenerative 
practices enable more sustainable farming.
Healthcare & 
pharmaceuticalsMedicines, vaccines, 
diagnostics, medical devices, 
hospital supplies, plastic 
packagingSector is dependent on active pharmaceutical 
ingredients (APIs), solvents, 
and excipients from chemicals; joint R&D in 
advanced drug delivery; strict Current Good 
Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) and 
regulatory standards.
Energy Refining oil/gas, production 
of hydrogen, batteries, 
wind turbine resins, 
 solar photovoltaics 
(PV), hydropower Clean energy technologies rely on chemical 
processes and materials; collaboration drives 
carbon capture and next-generation solutions.
Construction 
& infrastructureCement additives, insulation, 
plastics, coatings, adhesives, 
compositesChemicals enable energy efficiency and 
durability in buildings; innovations like carbon-
negative cement and bio-based insulation 
support green standards.
Transport 
& automotiveFuels, lubricants, 
composites, plastics, 
adhesives, EV batteriesAdvanced materials underpin EV safety, 
performance, and recyclability; recycling systems 
reduce reliance on critical raw materials.
Textiles & 
consumer goodsSynthetic fibres, dyes, 
plastics, detergents, 
cosmetics, cleaning 
productsSector relies on polymers and fibres; shift 
underway toward biomaterials, recyclables, and 
more sustainable consumer products.
Electronics & ICT Semiconductors (heavy 
input of water and silicon), 
circuit boards, displays, 
plastics, specialty chemicals 
for chip production Specialty chemicals are essential for 
semiconductors and electronics; innovation 
targets recyclable and sustainable materials.
Mining Reagents for ore processing 
(e.g. flotation agents, 
lixiviants), explosives, 
dust suppressants, water 
treatment chemicalsChemicals are essential in mineral extraction 
and processing; mining supplies critical raw 
materials (e.g. lithium, cobalt, rare earths) to the 
chemical sector; mutual reliance on innovation 
for circularity and sustainability.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 6
Contents | Part 2: Policies affecting the EU chemical sectorPart 2: Policies affecting the EU 
chemical sector
The chemical sector is influenced by international frameworks and a wide range of 
EU policies. These policies entail chemicals-specific regulations, as well as broader, 
cross-sectoral initiatives that indirectly impact the sector by setting sustainability and 
competitiveness goals. In addition, it is affected by social and just transition initiatives. 
Internationally, the Global Framework on Chemicals, adopted under UNEP in September 
2023, sets out five strategic objectives and 28 targets for the sound management of 
chemicals and waste and provides a shared vision for a safe, healthy, and sustainable 
future (UNEP , 2024b). It also reflects a shift in perspective towards a sector-based 
approach, while at the same time addressing the critical interdependencies between 
sectors on a systemic level. Shifting to a sector-based approach can enable more 
strategic collaboration with key stakeholders and implementation of comprehensive 
solutions.
At the EU level, the European Commission presented the Chemicals Industry Package 
as part of its 2025 Work Program, to strengthen the competitiveness, sustainability, and 
modernization of the sector (European Commission, 2025g). Key initiatives will include:
 ◾A revision of the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of 
Chemicals (REACH) Regulation, to simplify rules for the chemicals industry without 
compromising on safety or environmental protection.
 ◾A new European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) Basic Regulation that will establish an 
autonomous legal framework to enhance the Agency’s operational efficiency and 
regulatory clarity. It will streamline scientific opinion delivery, unify budgets, and 
transfer governance provisions currently embedded in the REACH Regulation into 
the new standalone framework.
 ◾The establishment of a Critical Chemicals Alliance of member states and 
stakeholders to address the risks of capacity closures and ensure fair competition. 
It will coordinate investment priorities, provide policy support to strategic production 
sites, and reinforce trade defence and import monitoring.
 ◾The swift implementation of the Affordable Energy Action Plan to lower energy 
and feedstock costs. The plan includes launching tripartite contracts that connect 
governments, clean energy producers, and industrial consumers to stabilize energy 
prices, boost investment in offshore wind and storage, and help deliver up to 88 
GW of offshore renewables and 200 GW of storage capacity by 2030 (European 
Commission, 2025d).
 ◾The promotion of circular economy solutions by creating Innovation and Substitution 
Hubs and providing fiscal incentives to stimulate demand for clean chemicals, 
mobilizing Horizon Europe funding to accelerate the development of safer substitutes, 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 7
Contents | Part 2: Policies affecting the EU chemical sectorand leveraging the Circular Economy Act to unlock secondary material markets and 
boosting recycling and bio-based inputs (European Commission, 2025e). 
 ◾A proposition of a science-based restriction on PFAS emissions, allowing their use 
only in critical applications. Promotion of remediation based on the polluter pays 
principle, and prioritization of the development of safer alternatives.
 ◾An integration with the Omnibus Simplification Package, expected to save EUR 363 
million annually by streamlining labelling, cosmetics rules, and fertilizer registration. 
Table 2 summarizes other key EU policies, and their main objectives. A table containing 
a broader, yet non-exhaustive, range of relevant policies can be found in Annex 2 . 
Table 2: Other key EU policies and objectives
Policy/initiative Description Key dates
Clean Industrial 
Deal (CID)Aligns industrial strategy with decarbonization, resource 
efficiency, and competitiveness through green innovation 
and procurementLaunched 
Q1 2025
Industrial 
Decarbonization 
Accelerator Act*Accelerates permitting for decarbonization and 
infrastructure, introduces clean product criteria, and 
low-carbon labellingExpected 
Q4 2025
Circular economy 
action plan (CEAP) & 
the Circular Economy 
Act (CEA)*The second circular economy action plan (CEAP) aims to 
reduce waste and enhance sustainability, while the Circular 
Economy Act, under the CID, will establish a Single Market 
for secondary raw materials to boost supply and demand 
for high-quality recycled inputsCEAP: 
Adopted Q1 
2020; CEA 
expected 

Packaging and 
Packaging Waste 
Regulation (PPWR)*Sets new EU-wide rules to reduce packaging waste, 
promote reuse and recycling, and limit harmful substancesLaunched 
Q1 2025
Industrial 
Decarbonization BankMobilizes EUR 100 billion to fund green industrial transition 
through grants, guarantees, and contracts for differenceExpected 
Q2 2026 
Clean Industrial Deal 
State Aid Framework* 
as part of CIDSimplifies state aid rules to support clean tech, reduce 
industrial energy costs, and de-risk private investmentsLaunched 
Q2 2025
PPA Pilot (EIB) EUR 500 million program to de-risk clean energy for 
energy-intensive firms via counter-guaranteesProposed 

Occupational Safety 
and Health Framework 
(EU Adoption)*Strengthens workplace safety and supports modernization 
in chemical facilitiesOutlined for 
the years 
2021-2027
Just Transition Fund Financial support to help carbon-intensive regions diversify, 
reskill workers, and modernize facilitiesDuration 
2021-2027 
Agenda Vision for 
Agriculture and FoodTightens pesticide rules and aligns trade standards, 
influencing chemical demandPresented 

* These policies currently have or will have partial or full legally binding components
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 8
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable financePart 3: Policy levers to 
support viability and increase 
sustainable finance 
From an investment perspective, chemicals (including pharmaceuticals, rubber, 
and plastics) take the lead in EU27 manufacturing, constituting 17.7% of the total 
investment, with automotive and food following. The petrochemicals sector accounts 
for more than 25% of the EU27 chemical sector’s overall investment (Cefic, 2024a; 
European Commission, 2025h). Similar to most players in the real economy, the 
chemical sector obtains capital through internal financing, loans, and public and private 
equity and debt markets.
Estimating investment requirements for the chemicals sector is very challenging and 
may vary significantly. The European Commission estimates that, out of the total 
estimated annual investment need of EUR 35 billion for industry between 2030 and 
2050 to meet climate targets, the chemicals sector accounts for 37%, representing an 
estimated annual need of EUR 12.95 billion (European Commission, 2025h). However, 
another estimate shows that funding net-zero initiatives in the chemical sector alone-
one of the hardest-to-abate sectors-would require EUR 35 billion yearly based on a 2022 
report, with a financing gap estimated at EUR 12.6 billion (Accenture, 2022).
Some of the structural barriers explored in Chapter 1.1 translate into factors causing 
unfavorable financing and investment conditions in the sector, including sustainable 
funds, that also show limited exposure to chemical companies: 1) higher feedstock and 
energy cost, including two to five times those of the U.S and China; 2) end consumer 
demand for the sector has flattened, for example in consumer goods among others; 
and 3) excess supply from lower cost markets. Given a higher cost base, weak demand, 
and competitive pressure, bond and loan market pricing are reflecting these negative 
pressures, including lower earnings results leading to decreasing stock prices and 
ratings downgrades for companies in the sector (Pitchbook, 2025).
As a proxy for investor sentiment in the sector, inclusion of this sector in relevant 
indices remains low, in Europe and beyond. For example, under the MSCI ACWI index, 
the chemical sector is classified under Materials among other sectors like construction 
and metals and mining (MSCI, 2024). Materials make up 3.44% of the index’s sector 
weighting, so the chemicals subsector inevitably weighs less (MSCI, 2025). For the 
STOXX Europe 600 Index, chemicals as a super-sector make up 3.61% of its sector 
weighting. Sector categories may vary across data providers in indices and may not be 
completely comparable (STOXX, n.d.).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 9
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable financeBased on the top 10 sustainable funds over five years according to Morningstar, only a 
few include chemical companies (Morningstar, 2024). Some of the factors contributing 
to this include recent performance decline. According to a McKinsey study, since 2024 
the chemical sector has not outperformed the market compared to the MSCI World 
Index (Lorbeer & Ezekoye, 2024).
The chemical sector has had a relatively small percentage of green bond issuances. Of 
the USD 583.9 billion (EUR ~497.3 billion) green bond issuance in 2024 (ICE, 2024), only 
USD 5.5 billion (EUR ~4.8 billion) was from the chemical sector (Bloomberg terminal, 
August 25, 2025). From 2024 to July 2025, there were 22 green bond issuances totalling 
USD 6.76 billion (EUR ~5.8 billion) in the sector (Bloomberg terminal, August 25, 2025). 
Use of proceeds examples include recycling and upcycling of waste, reduction of GHG 
from production processes, energy-efficient systems, and innovative R&D projects, 
among others. However, green bond issuance within the EU has declined in recent years 
due to ESG backlash, inflation, higher interest rates, and market uncertainty. 
The transition of Europe’s chemical sector presents both significant challenges and 
opportunities for financing.1 Key potential policy levers can be summarized in Table 3 .
Table 3: Potential policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance
Topic Policy levers
De-risking mechanisms to 
improve the bankability and 
investment viability of the 
EU chemical sector1. Innovating funding mechanisms, initiatives, and tools 
to enhance bankability.
2. Scaling circular and resource-efficient models to 
enhance investment viability.
Enhancing the enabling 
environment for the 
chemical sector 
to transition3. Enhancing data transparency and standardization for 
informed investment decisions. 
4. Reducing administrative burden across the value 
chain, especially for SMEs.
Ensuring a coherent and 
horizontal policy approach 
to the chemical sector 
transition and financing5. Integrating policy frameworks for a sustainable and 
competitive transition.
6. Ensuring long-term policy stability to drive 
sustainable transformation.
7. Encouraging banks to engage with policymakers 
and clients to support a transition that upholds 
environmental safeguards.
1 Some of these challenges and opportunities were raised during 2025 Clean Industrial Deal discussions 
co-hosted by UNEP FI and the EBF. Policymakers, banks, and industry representatives highlighted the need for 
stronger alignment between policy ambition and financing realities.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 10
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance
De-risking; enhancing bankability 
and investment viability
3.1 Innovating funding mechanisms, initiatives, and tools to 
enhance bankability
Many projects will struggle to progress beyond demonstration phase without more risk-
sharing instruments. This gap is especially acute in the chemical sector, where projects 
at higher technology readiness levels moving from pilot to commercial scale face steep 
capital needs and high risks but lack blended finance tools to de-risk investment (Cefic, 
2025b).
Tools such as guarantees, blended finance, and carbon contracts for difference can 
reduce the risk premium of early-stage or low-carbon projects, helping banks finance 
new technologies with clearer long-term returns.
 ◾The Industrial Decarbonization Bank (IDB) aims to mobilize more than EUR 100 
billion to de-risk large-scale decarbonization projects through grants, guarantees, 
subordinated debt, and  carbon contracts for difference (CCfDs), which provide 
revenue certainty by fixing carbon prices and supporting cleaner production methods 
(European Commission, 2025b; European Commission, n.d (a)). 
 ◾The Clean Industrial Deal State Aid Framework (CISAF) will also allow direct grants, 
tax advantages (such as accelerated depreciation), guarantees and other forms of 
aid, subject to compatibility conditions including competitive bidding processes and 
funding-gap assessments (European Commission, 2025c).
 ◾The Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) for 2028-2034, amounting to nearly 
EUR 2 trillion, will expand long-term EU investment capacity with a focus on 
competitiveness, research, and the clean transition. This budgetary framework could 
unlock additional funding streams and create synergies with sector-specific initiatives, 
reinforcing blended finance opportunities for capital-intensive industries such as 
chemicals (European Commission, 2024). 
 ◾The European Commission has developed a broad set of funding mechanisms 
to help reach the objectives that are part of the chemicals strategy, including the 
Recovery and Resilience Facility, InvestEU Program, Cohesion Policy Funds, LIFE 
Program, Horizon Europe, Just Transition Fund, and Digital Europe Program, which 
are further described in Annex 2 (European Commission, n.d.(b)).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 11
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable financeTo make these instruments more accessible and effective for financial institutions, 
policymakers should ensure that the Industrial Decarbonization Bank, CISAF, and the 
next MFF are designed with clear eligibility criteria and strong risk-sharing mechanisms 
that could benefit most material industrial sectors such as Chemicals. In parallel, banks 
can start engaging with EU institutions, multilaterals, and industry to co-design and pilot 
blended-finance structures, to ensure their practicability and scalability.
3.2 Scaling circular and resource-efficient models to enhance 
investment viability
Transitioning from linear production to circular, resource-efficient models-focused on 
reuse, recycling, and material substitution-creates more stable and recurring value 
streams that improves project profitability, enhancing the attractiveness of chemical-
related investments for banks. 
 ◾EU policy initiatives could strengthen the economic viability of circular business 
models. This includes explicitly and systematically integrating circular principles 
(durability, repairability, and recyclability) into the eligibility criteria for EU public 
financing instruments. This includes explicitly and systematically integrating circular 
principles of durability, repairability, and recyclability into the eligibility criteria for EU 
public financing instruments. Initiatives such as the EU's Hydrogen Bank or Industrial 
Decarbonization Bank could be replicated for circularity. Such a "Bank of Circularity" 
could offer off-take guarantees for recycled inputs in industry sectors or for new 
technologies, which, combined with other forms of de-risking and deployment of 
public-private financing schemes, could also enhance the bankability of circular 
business models, projects, or activities (EBF 2025a). 
 ◾In parallel, banks and investors should consider integrating circular principles into 
their strategies and business practices, to scale up finance for circular solutions 
and drive systemic change. This includes dedicated financing products for circular 
solutions and promoting the integration of resource-efficiency considerations into 
their risk-return financial models. In this regard, UNEP FI's Circular Economy as an 
Enabler for Responsible Banking (2024) series of resources helps banks around the 
world operationalize the interlinkages between the circular economy and climate, 
nature, pollution, and healthy and inclusive economies. 
 ◾Financing the circular and resource-efficient transition is not a new concept; there 
are several projects in place that can serve as examples for future financial schemes 
(EIB, 2020). 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 12
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance
Enabling environment for 
the chemical sector
3.3 Enhancing data transparency and standardization for 
informed investment decisions
Limited availability of reliable, standardized data on emissions, resource use, and 
technology performance significantly constrains investment decisions in the chemical 
sector. Standardized environmental and transition data, harmonized under EU standards 
like the CSRD and Taxonomy, can lower due-diligence costs and reduce uncertainty for 
banks and investors, enabling more efficient capital allocation. 
 ◾To effectively track progress toward a clean industry, financial institutions require 
coherent, trustworthy, and forward-looking information on how companies source 
materials and integrate circular design principles. Standardization and credibility of 
data reported under the European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) remains 
essential. Complementary instruments, such as the Digital Product Passport (DPP), 
can strengthen transparency and build investor confidence by providing reliable data. 
As President Ursula von der Leyen underlined in her 2025 State of the Union: “Only 
what gets measured, gets done” (European Commission, 2025a).
The UN Principles for Responsible Banking (PRB) Client Engagement workstreams, 
Sectors Mapping, Impact Radar , and Human Rights toolkits are good examples of tools 
and resources to navigate these complexities by structuring industries’ positive and 
negative impacts across environmental, social, and economic dimensions and thereby 
enhance impact assessment, inform portfolio strategy, and strengthen the alignment 
of financing with sustainability objectives. Complementing these tools, PRB’s Transition 
Plan Guidance helps banks assess the credibility of clients’ transition plans and further 
highlights sector-level transition levers that banks can draw on to finance the real-
economy transition (UNEP FI, 2025).
3.4 Reducing administrative burden across 
the value chain, especially for SMEs
The EU chemical sector’s vast network of small and medium-sized enterprizes (SMEs) 
faces high compliance costs, complex administrative requirements, and limited access 
to finance. Simplified regulatory frameworks, stronger guarantee mechanisms, and 
SME-focused financial products-such as aggregated project financing platforms-are 
essential to help smaller firms integrate into cleaner, more competitive value chains.
 ◾One key enabler is the Digital Product Passport (DPP), to be implemented in 
phases through 2029. As a central tool for sharing critical sustainability information, 
the DPP will enable targeted disclosure of product data, support circular resource 
management, and enhance traceability of substances of concern that hinder 
recycling-ensuring compatibility across recycling technologies (Cefic, 2025c). Further 
streamlining permitting and procurement processes, while improving access to public 
incentives, can shorten project timelines and lower financing costs-particularly for 
SMEs developing sustainable chemical solutions. 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 13
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance ◾Developing a digital one-stop-shop platform and fast-track procedures for projects 
meeting predefined sustainability benchmarks could simplify access to standardized 
blended finance instruments at the EU level. This would make it easier for SMEs-who 
represent more than 96% of the sector (European Commission, 2023b)-to identify 
relevant subsidies and accelerate project deployment.
To support SMEs, platforms like the PRB Clients and Customers SME Engagement 
workstreams focus on providing toolkits, compendia of good practices and lessons 
learned and case studies for SMEs, and the PRB target setting on Financial Health and 
Inclusion, and on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment, specifically provides 
concrete related actions applicable to SMEs (UNEP FI, 2024b; UNEP FI, 2024a). Banks 
can make use of these tools and streamline onboarding and credit processes for 
SMEs, using more accessible documentation, digital platforms and easing their client 
processes.
Ensuring a coherent and 
horizontal policy approach
3.5 Integrating policy frameworks for a sustainable and 
competitive transition
Coordinating environmental, industrial, circular and energy policies is critical to ensure 
consistent and effective incentives. Policy coherence can strengthen competitiveness 
while accelerating the green transition.
 ◾Energy policies are crucial for the European chemical industry, as natural gas prices 
are three times higher than in the US and reliance on imported feedstocks have already 
led to plant closures and deterred new investment (OPIS, 2025). Linking CID 
measures with the Action Plan on Affordable Energy, the European Grids Package, 
and the Renewable Energy Directive can help restore competitiveness. This is 
especially relevant for the chemical sector as high energy costs have already forced 
cracker closures across Europe.
 ◾Other complementary initiatives include:
 ◽The Circular Economy Action Plan 2.0 and upcoming Circular Economy Act aim 
to reduce material dependency and boost secondary raw materials markets. 
 ◽The Packaging and Packaging Waste Regulation and the Single-Use Plastics 
Directive further restrict virgin materials, single-use plastics, and PFAS in 
packaging. 
 ◾The European Climate Law-aligned sectoral decarbonization pathways offer a 
coherent, science-based framework that helps align industrial and climate policies 
across sectors, including chemicals, thereby supporting more consistent financing 
and transition planning European Commisssion, 2025f).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 14
Contents | Part 3: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable financeThe UNEP FI Regulatory Implementation Support Programme is a related programme 
designed to help stakeholders understand, implement, and comply with sustainable 
finance policies, regulations and reporting requirements. Understanding these policy 
developments can help banks align their strategies and policies, increasing de-risking 
products and incentivizing the sector through targeted investments. Similarly, the C-ESG 
Risk Roundtable provides useful resources to facilitate banks with integration of ESG 
factors into their risk management in compliance with the EU regulation.
3.6 Ensuring long-term policy stability to drive sustainable 
transformation
Maintaining alignment with the EU Green Deal, Climate Law and broader environmental 
and social targets will ensure the sector’s transformation addresses the economic 
challenges related to climate, nature, human rights, and health and inclusivity, while 
giving investors long-term policy certainty. For chemicals, long-term predictability 
is essential, as stable and transparent policies enable investors to plan large-scale 
transformation projects with confidence. This implies:
 ◾Consistent policy signals-anchored in the European Climate Law’s 2030, 2040 and 
2050 targets and broader environmental targets, reinforced by the CID and Industrial 
Decarbonization Bank-can restore confidence and mobilize private capital at scale.
 ◾Coherence across regulatory, fiscal, and industrial policies. For banks, such 
predictability is essential to integrate transition risks into their business plans and 
lending strategies and develop long-term financing instruments. 
A stable and credible policy environment not only lowers the cost of capital but also 
can help position the financial sector as a key enabler of Europe’s sustainable industrial 
transformation.
3.7 Encouraging banks to engage with policymakers and clients 
to support a transition that upholds environmental safeguards
Close collaboration among banks, policymakers, and industry clients is vital to ensure 
that the chemical sector’s transition remains both competitive and environmentally 
sound. Financial institutions can bridge policy ambition and market reality-helping 
shape enabling frameworks, mobilize capital for sustainable solutions, and align 
transition pathways with the EU’s climate, pollution, and circular economy objectives. 
They can contribute by:
 ◾Supporting clients with targeted products and advisory services-such as 
sustainability-linked loans and finance solutions-that encourage substitution of 
hazardous substances and investment in circular business models.
 ◾Engaging in structured policy dialogue to share financing insights that inform the 
design of de-risking tools and transition incentives under the Clean Industrial Deal, the 
Chemicals Package and other related initiatives.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 15
Contents | Part 4: Examples from interdependent sectorsPart 4: Examples from 
interdependent sectors
Building on these levers, the following selected examples demonstrate how targeted 
financing instruments, guarantees, and blended finance structures can de-risk 
investments, mobilize private capital, and accelerate clean technologies. Additional 
examples can be found in the EBF’s report on increasing the bankability of transition 
projects under the Clean Industrial Deal (EBF, 2025b). 
Sector Example Summary 
Material 
recyclingNovamont 
Renewable 
ChemistryThe EIB is providing EUR 30 million to support the rollout 
of innovative technologies for producing bioplastics and 
bio-chemicals, intended for use in both industrial (e.g. 
plasticisers, biodegradable lubricants) and consumer (e.g. 
cosmetics, packaging, carrier bags) applications.
Energy
(part of the 
EBF report) H2 Green Steel: 
Decarbonizing 
SteelH2 Green Steel is a Swedish industrial project developing 
large-scale fossil-free steel production by replacing coal with 
renewable hydrogen. The initiative addresses one of Europe’s 
hardest-to-abate sectors, aiming for up to 95% lower CO₂ 
emissions compared to blast furnaces. Its EUR 4 billion+ 
financing package combined public support with private debt 
(EU Innovation Fund, Riksgälden, Euler Hermes, InvestEU, 
EIB, NIB), showing how guarantees and grants can de-risk 
major decarbonization projects. The chemical sector supplies 
electrolysis materials, and process chemicals that are essential 
for green hydrogen production. 
Transport 
(part of the 
EBF report)Modernization 
of Palermo-
Catania 
Railway LineA EUR 3.4 billion financing package enabled the upgrade of 
Italy’s Palermo-Catania railway, with contributions from the EIB, 
Intesa Sanpaolo Imi Corporate & Investment Banking Division, 
and the CDP . The structure combined loans, counter-guarantees, 
and intermediated financing, providing a model for scaling 
strategic green infrastructure. The chemical sector supports 
such projects through adhesives, coatings, and composites that 
improve resilience and durability.
Agriculture Bioeconomy 
on Marine Sites 
Association, 
GermanyA EUR 20 million public investment by Germany’s BMBF funds 
BaMS, a blue bioeconomy initiative supporting both academic 
research and industrial innovation to integrate material and 
energy flows across sectors, such as nutrient cycling and 
bio-based fertilizers (BMBF and BMEL, 2022).
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 16
Contents | Part 5: Next stepsPart 5: Next steps
The European Commission's Chemicals Industry Package will mark major policy 
milestones to boost the sector’s competitiveness, sustainability, and resilience. It will 
include an Action Plan for the Chemicals Industry and a Simplification Package to 
modernize EU chemical rules, reduce administrative burdens, and streamline REACH and 
ECHA procedures. Key measures will establish a Critical Chemicals Alliance to address 
the risks of capacity closures in the sector and applying trade defence measures to 
ensure fair competition; lower energy and feedstock costs through the Affordable 
Energy Action Plan; and provide stronger incentives for innovation, circularity, and 
clean technology adoption. A science-based restriction on PFAS and clearer fiscal and 
regulatory frameworks are also expected to support safer, more sustainable production.
Leading up to the first Global Framework on Chemicals International Conference 
(November 2026), a finance workstream will work to mobilize the finance sector under 
the Global Framework on Chemicals Implementation Programs supported by IOMC. 
The following timeline highlights other major upcoming EU policies that will influence the 
competitiveness, decarbonization and circularity of the chemical sector.
Q4 2025 Q4 2025 Q2 2026 2026+
REACH 
RegulationIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
Accelerator ActIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
BankCircular 
Economy Act
In the coming months, stakeholders should prepare for new consultations and funding 
calls tied to upcoming initiatives. The Chemicals Industry Package is expected to link 
closely with the Clean Industrial Deal and Industrial Decarbonization Bank, opening 
up opportunities for blended finance, guarantees, and de-risking tools to accelerate 
investment in low-carbon and circular chemistry. Monitoring these initiatives will be 
essential to anticipate regulatory impacts, align transition strategies, and engage early 
with the Commission’s implementation process. 
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 17
Contents | Annex 1: UNEP FI Impact Radar and Sectors MappingAnnex 1: UNEP FI Impact Radar 
and Sectors Mapping
The below figure shows the UNEP FI Impact Radar which is a compilation of Impact 
Areas and Topics across the three pillars of sustainable development (Social, Socio-
economic, Natural Environment).

Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 18
Contents | Annex 1: UNEP FI Impact Radar and Sectors MappingAn extraction of the UNEP FI Sectors Mappings shows the positive and negative sector-
impact associations contained within the chemicals sector (bold indicates it is a key 
sector-impact association) using the impact areas/topics of the Impact Radar.
Chemical sector impact types Impact areas
Positive sector-impact associations on: Employment
Wages
Negative sector-impact associations on: Health and safety
Wages
Social protection
Climate stability
Waterbodies
Air
Soil
Species
Habitat
Resource intensity
Waste
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 19
Contents | Annex 2: EU and global policies and initiatives affecting the chemical sector (non-exhaustive list)Annex 2: EU and global 
policies and initiatives 
affecting the chemical sector 
(non-exhaustive list)
Classification Policy Description Key dates
Chemicals-
Specific 
policiesChemicals 
Industry Package*Comprehensive package to 
strengthen competitiveness, simplify 
chemical regulation, revise REACH, and 
modernize ECHARevision 
of REACH 
expected 
Q4 2025 
Global Framework 
on ChemicalsThe Global Framework on Chemicals 
(GFC), provides a comprehensive 
plan to guide countries and stakeholders 
in jointly addressing the lifecycle 
of chemicalsAdopted in 
2023, First 
International 
Conference 
to be held in 
November 2026
BRS (Basel, 
Rotterdam and 
Stockholm) 
ConventionsThree international legal instruments 
addressing transboundary movements 
of hazardous wastes and their disposal 
(Basel), the prior informed consent 
procedure for certain hazardous 
chemicals and pesticides in international 
trade (Rotterdam) and persistent organic 
pollutants (Stockholm)Integration 
of all three 
conventions 
in a single 
secretariat 
in 2013
Minimata Convention 
on MercuryDesigned to protect human health and 
the environment from mercury pollution.Adopted in 2013, 
entered into 
force 2017
Other 
policies 
affecting the 
chemical 
sectorEuropean 
Climate Law*Sets binding climate neutrality by 2050 
and 55% GHG reduction by 2030Launched 2021
Clean Industrial 
Deal (CID)Aligns industrial strategy with 
decarbonization, resource efficiency, 
and competitiveness through green 
innovation and procurementLaunched 
Q1 2025
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 20
Contents | Annex 2: EU and global policies and initiatives affecting the chemical sector (non-exhaustive list)Classification Policy Description Key dates
Other 
policies 
affecting the 
chemical 
sectorIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
Accelerator Act*Accelerates permitting for 
decarbonization and infrastructure, 
introduces clean product criteria, and 
low-carbon labellingExpected 
Q4 2025
Packaging and 
Packaging Waste 
Regulation (PPWR)*Sets new EU-wide rules to reduce 
packaging waste, promote reuse and 
recycling, and limit harmful substancesLaunched 
Q1 2025
Single-Use Plastics 
Directive (SUPD)*Targets the most common single-use 
plastics by banking specific items and 
setting recycling targetsLaunched 2019; 
Updated 2023
Global Plastic 
Treaty currently being 
negotiatedThe current negotiation of a Global 
Plastic Treaty with the aim to end 
plastic pollution includes discussions on 
chemicals of concern in plastic productsNegotiation 
launched 
2022; Under 
negotiation 

Agenda Vision for 
Agriculture and FoodRoadmap to create a resilient, future-
proof agri-food system with fair 
income, climate alignment, and rural 
developmentLaunched 
Q1 2025
Revision of 
CBAM (Carbon 
Border Adjustment 
Mechanism) Revision aims to simplify and strengthen 
CBAM to prevent carbon leakage 
effectively while minimizing burdens 
particularly on SMEsWill apply as of 
January 2026
Circular Economy 
Action Plan (CEAP)European Commission’s strategic 
framework that aims to promote 
sustainability and resource efficiency 
by boosting innovation, recycling, and 
circular use of materialsAdopted in 2015
Circular Economy 
Act (CEA)*Proposed EU regulation setting 
mandatory requirements to improve 
transparency, recyclability, and 
secondary raw material use across 
sectorsExpected 2027
Omnibus 
Simplification 
PackageSet of targeted changes to multiple EU 
chemical-related regulations, aimed 
at streamlining compliance, reducing 
administrative burdens, and modernizing 
procedures in the chemical sector. The 
main areas affected are chemical 
classification/labelling/packaging (CLP), 
cosmetics, and fertilizersExpected 
to be fully 
implemented by 
the end of 2025
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 21
Contents | Annex 2: EU and global policies and initiatives affecting the chemical sector (non-exhaustive list)Classification Policy Description Key dates
Social 
and Just 
Transition- 
related 
initiativesPromoting Social 
Fairness in the 
Modern EconomyPromotes social cohesion through 
housing, job quality, and social rights to 
address growing inequalitiesLaunched 2017; 
Updated 
Q1 2025
Just Transition 
Mechanism 
including the Just 
Transition FundTool aiming to enhance equity of the 
transition; Provides financial support to 
regions and workers most affected by 
the EU’s shift to climate neutrality Launched 2021; 
Reviewed 2025 
Social Climate Fund * Will provide funds until 2032 to help EU 
Member States mitigate social impacts 
of Emissions Trading System 2 (ETS2) Expected 2026
Occupational 
Safety and Health 
Framework (EU 
Adoption)*Strengthens workplace safety and 
supports modernization in chemical 
facilitiesOutlined for 
the years 
2021-2027
European Pillar 
of Social Rights 
Action Plan Initiative that translates 20 key 
social rights principles into concrete 
actions aimed at creating fairer labor 
markets and social protection systems 
across Europe2025 review
Quality 
Jobs RoadmapInitiative aimed at promoting high-quality, 
sustainable employment across all 
sectors. It is developed in consultation 
with social partners and seeks to 
support collective bargaining, fair wages, 
good working conditions, training, and 
just job transitionsExpected for the 
end of 2025
EU Anti- 
Poverty StrategyEU-wide plan aimed at eradicating 
poverty by 2050. It focuses on 
addressing the root causes of poverty, 
emphasizing a rights-based, inclusive 
approach that tackles structural and 
systemic inequalities.Expected to 
be formally 
presented 
in 2026
Union of Skills plan Strategy to strengthen Europe’s 
competitiveness by supporting 
workforce adaptability to the digital and 
green transitionsLaunched in 
March 2025
Joint Pact 
for European 
Social DialogueFormal agreement between the 
European Commission and European 
cross-industry social partners, aiming to 
strengthen social dialogue by enhancing 
the role of social partners in shaping 
labor market, employment, and social 
policies. Promoting fair and sustainable 
economic development, quality jobs, and 
social dialogue to manage change linked 
to digital and green transitions.Signed in 
March 2025
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 22
Contents | Annex 2: EU and global policies and initiatives affecting the chemical sector (non-exhaustive list)Classification Policy Description Key dates
Financing 
and 
investment-
related 
initiativesIndustrial 
Decarbonization 
BankMobilizes 100 billion EUR to fund green 
industrial transition through grants, 
guarantees, and contracts for differenceExpected 
Q2 2026 
Clean Industrial Deal 
State Aid Framework*Simplifies state aid rules to support 
clean tech, reduce industrial energy 
costs, and de-risk private investmentsLaunched 
Q2 2025
PPA Pilot (EIB) 500 million EUR program to de-risk clean 
energy for energy-intensive firms via 
counter-guaranteesProposed 2025
* These policies currently have or will have partial or full legally binding components.
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 23
Contents | Annex 3: EU funding mechanisms to help reach the objectives that are part of the EU’s Chemicals Strategy for SustainabilityAnnex 3: EU funding mechanisms 
to help reach the objectives that 
are part of the EU’s Chemicals 
Strategy for Sustainability 
Programme Description
Recovery and 
Resilience FacilitySupports Member State reforms and investments post-COVID; several 
already include funding for a safe and sustainable chemical sector, plus 
generic programmes on electrification, green skills, decontamination and 
resource-efficiency
InvestEU 
ProgrammeBoosts investment in sustainable infrastructure, SMEs, research/ 
innovation/digitization, and social investment/skills; chemical projects 
funded include identifying toxic chemicals in wastewater and producing 
biochemicals from algae
Cohesion Policy 
FundsERDF : invests in research & innovation, Digital Agenda, SMEs, low-carbon 
economy; ESF+ : funds education, skills adaptation, labor mobility, social 
inclusion; CF: supports transport and environmental projects in lower-income 
Member States
LIFE Programme Finances projects in nature/biodiversity, circular economy, climate change, and 
clean energy; chemical-related projects include consumer information, safe 
and sustainable chemicals, and substitution of harmful substances
Horizon Europe EU R&I programme (2021-2027); funds development of innovative solutions 
for persistent and mobile chemicals and combined exposures to industrial 
chemicals and pharmaceuticals
Just 
Transition FundSupports regions and people in climate transition; finances projects linked 
to phasing out coal/lignite, and innovation in sustainable technologies, 
digitalization, and up/reskilling of vulnerable groups
Digital Europe 
ProgrammeProvides funding in five areas: high-performance computing, AI, cybersecurity, 
advanced digital skills, and digital technology use across economy and society
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 24
Contents | Annex 4: Stakeholders of the EU chemical sector (non-exhaustive list)Annex 4: Stakeholders of 
the EU chemical sector 
(non-exhaustive list)
Main associations in the European chemicals sector include: 
Association Description
Leading trade association for Europe’s chemical companies (around 13% 
of global production), providing regulatory expertise, policy advocacy, and 
support for a sustainable and competitive industry
A Cefic group representing fine chemical manufacturers, focusing on APIs, 
excipients, agrochemicals, and intermediates, while promoting safety and 
sustainability standards
Umbrella organization for 130,000 chemists in 50 member societies, 
fostering scientific exchange, hosting conferences, and providing evidence-
based policy input
EU body implementing chemicals legislation (REACH, CLP , BPR, PIC), 
evaluating substances, proposing risk management, and promoting 
chemical safety
EU initiative advancing next-generation risk assessment aligned with the 
Chemicals Strategy and Green Deal, developing data, methods, and tools 
for regulators
Platform of 11 associations from sectors using chemical mixtures 
(cosmetics, paints, detergents, construction), supporting REACH/CLP 
implementation and ensuring user needs are reflected in EU policy
Other stakeholders of the European chemicals sector include:
Association Description
Europe’s largest network of environmental NGOs, advocating stronger 
EU chemicals laws (notably REACH), faster substitution of hazardous 
substances, and prevention of toxic chemicals in products, the environment, 
and the circular economy
Charity protecting people and wildlife from harmful chemicals like PFAS and 
hormone disruptors by advancing science, advocating stronger regulation, 
and informing the public about health and biodiversity risks
Non-profit network of 70+ groups promoting health-based evidence to 
policymakers, aiming to reduce and eliminate hazardous chemical exposure 
through strong protective laws
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 25
Contents | ReferencesReferences
Accenture (2022). The chemical indus-
try’s road to net zero: Costs and oppor-
tunities of the EU Green Deal. Accenture. 
accenture.com/content/dam/accenture/
final/a-com-migration/r3-3/pdf/pdf-174/
accenture-chemicals-costs-opportuni-
ties-eu-green-deal.pdf 
Blumenthal, J., Diamond, M., Hoffmann, 
M., Wang, Y. (2022). Time to Break the ‘Lock-
In’ Impediments to Chemicals Management . 
Environmental Science and Technology . pubs.
acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.1c06615 . 
BMBF and BMEL (2022). Bioökonomie in 
Deutschland-Chancen für eine biobasierte 
und nachhaltige Zukunft. German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research and 
Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture. 
biooekonomie.de/sites/default/files/2022-05/
Biooekonomie_in_Deutschland_2022.pdf .
Cefic (n.d.). Sustainability Performance . 
Cefic. cefic.org/sustainability-performance/
environment/ .
Cefic (2024a). 2024 Facts and Figures. 
Cefic. cefic.org/facts-and-figures-of-the-euro-
pean-chemical-industry/.
Cefic (2024b). Chemical Industry access 
to Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) . Cefic. 
cefic.org/resources/chemical-industry-ac -
cess-to-carbon-capture-and-storage-ccs-re-
search-paper/ .
Cefic (2025a). Chemical trends report . 
Cefic. cefic.org/app/uploads/2025/05/
Cefic-Chemical-Trends-Report-Q1-2025.pdf .
Cefic (2025b). Improving the EU 
R&I funding landscape: Addressing 
current challenges. Cefic. cefic.org/app/
uploads/2025/03/Cefic-position-improv-
ing-EU-RI-Funding-Landscape.pdf.Cefic (2025c). Policy Requirements for 
a Circular, Competitive and more Autono -
mous EU Chemical Industry-The role of 
the chemical sector in a circular economy . 
Cefic. cefic.org// app/uploads/2025/07/
Policy-Requirements-for-a-Circular-Competi -
tive-and-More-Autonomous-EU-Chemical-In -
dustry.pdf .
Cleantech for Europe (2025). Cleantech 
Reality Check-Revitalising manufacturing in 
Europe Cleantech for Europe. cleantechfo -
reurope.com/publications/cleantech-reali -
ty-check/crc-series-3 .
Cropper, M., Dunlop, S., Hinshawa H., 
Landrigane, P ., Park, Y. , Symeonides, C. 
(2024). “The benefits of removing toxic 
chemicals from plastics”. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. pdfs.semanticscholar.
org/92a5/10a2337d90b02c4181d0d2d722c -
c38e5f8a5.pdf
EBF (2025a). EBF submits recommenda -
tions to create robust business cases and 
unlock private financing for the EU Circular 
Economy. ebf.eu/ebf-media-centre/updates/
ebf-submits-recommendations-to-create-ro -
bust-business-cases-and-unlock-private-fi -
nancing-for-the-eu-circular-economy/ .
EBF (2025b). Increasing Bankability 
of Transition & the Clean Industrial Deal. 
European Banking Federation. ebf.eu/wp-con -
tent/uploads/2025/09/Increasing-bankabili -
ty-of-transition-the-Clean-Industrial-Deal.pdf .
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 26
Contents | ReferencesECB (2025). Opinion of the European 
Central Bank of 8 May 2025 on proposals 
for amendments to corporate sustain -
ability reporting and due diligence require-
ments (CON/2025/10). European Central 
Bank. ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/legal/ecb.
leg_con_2025_10.en.pdf?330cb335ad9426c -
d4a64dbe4021597f1
EEA (2022). Chemicals and Health 
European Environment Agency. eea.europa.
eu/en/analysis/publications/zero-pollution/
health/chemicals-and-health .
EEA (2023). Managing the systemic use of 
chemicals in Europe European Environment 
Agency. eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/publica -
tions/managing-the-systemic-use-of-chemi -
cals.
EEA (2025a). EEA greenhouse gases-data 
viewer. European Environmental Agency. eea.
europa.eu/en/analysis/maps-and-charts/
greenhouse-gases-viewer-data-viewers .
EEA (2025b). Zero pollution monitoring and 
outlook 2025. European Environment Agency. 
eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/publications/
zero-pollution-monitoring-and-outlook-report.
EEA (2025c). Total greenhouse gas 
emissions in the chemical industry. European 
Environment Agency. eea.europa.eu/en/
european-zero-pollution-dashboards/indica -
tors/total-greenhouse-gas-emissions-in-the-
chemical-industry .
EIB (2020). The EIB Circular Economy 
Guide Supporting the circular transition. 
European Investment Bank. eib.org/files/
publications/thematic/circular_economy_
guide_en.pdf .
EIB (2025). EIB Group increases 2025 
financing ceiling to record EUR 100 billion to 
step up investments in security and defence, 
energy grids and Europe’s tech leadership . 
European Investment Bank. eib.org/en/press/
all/2025-247-eib-group-increases-2025-fi -
nancing-ceiling-to-record-eur100-billion-to-
step-up-investments-in-security-and-defence-
energy-grids-and-europe-s-tech-leadership .EuRIC (2025). Joint open letter: Europe’s 
plastics recycling & post-consumer textiles 
industries need urgent support . Recycling 
Europe. euric.org/resource-hub/letters/
joint-open-letter-europes-plastics-re-
cycling-post-consumer-textiles-indus -
tries-need-urgent-support.
European Commission (n.d. (a)). Compet -
itive bidding. European Commission. climate.
ec.europa.eu/eu-action/eu-funding-cli -
mate-action/innovation-fund/competitive-bid -
ding_en .
European Commission (n.d. (b)). Funding 
for the chemicals strategy. European Commis -
sion. environment.ec.europa.eu/topics/
chemicals/funding-chemicals-strategy_en.
European Commission (2020). Chemicals 
strategy. European Commission. environment.
ec.europa.eu/strategy/chemicals-strategy_en. 
European Commission (2023a). Packaging 
& Packaging Waste Regulation . European 
Commission. environment.ec.europa.eu/
topics/waste-and-recycling/packaging-waste/
packaging-packaging-waste-regulation_en .
European Commission (2023b). Transition 
pathway for the chemical industry. European 
Commission. ec.europa.eu/docsroom/
documents/54595 .
European Commission (2024). EU 
budget 2028-2034 . European Commission. 
commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/
eu-budget/long-term-eu-budget/
eu-budget-2028-2034_en .
European Commission (2025a). 2025 
State of the Union Address by President von 
der Leyen (Speech) . European Commission. 
ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
detail/ov/SPEECH_25_2053 .
European Commission (2025b). Clean 
Industrial Deal. European Commission. 
commission.europa.eu/topics/eu-competi -
tiveness/clean-industrial-deal_en .
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 27
Contents | ReferencesEuropean Commission (2025c). Clean 
Industrial Deal State Aid Framework 
(CISAF). European Commission. competi -
tion-policy.ec.europa.eu/about/contribu -
tion-clean-just-and-competitive-transition/
clean-industrial-deal-state-aid-framework-
cisaf_en .
European Commission (2025d). Commis-
sioner Jørgensen announces first 2 sectorial 
tripartite contracts European Commission. 
energy.ec.europa.eu/news/commissioner-jor -
gensen-announces-first-2-sectorial-tripar -
tite-contracts-2025-09-05_en .
European Commission (2025e). 
Commission strengthens Europe’s chemical 
industry European Commission . ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_25_1755
European Commission (2025f). Making 
finance flows consistent with climate 
goals-European Climate Law-aligned EU 
sectoral decarbonisation pathways. European 
Commission. climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/
eu-funding-climate-action/making-finance-
flows-consistent-climate-goals_en#europe -
an-climate-law-aligned-eu-sectoral-decarboni -
sation-pathways .
European Commission (2025g). Plan for 
stronger EU chemical industry. European 
Commission. commission.europa.eu/
news-and-media/news/plan-stron -
ger-eu-chemical-industry-2025-07-08_en .
European Commission (2025h). Platform 
on Sustainable Finance report: Monitoring 
capital flows to sustainable investments. 
European Commission. finance.ec.europa.eu/
publications/platform-sustainable-finance-re-
port-monitoring-capital-flows-sustainable-in -
vestments_en .
ICE (2024). Sustainable Bond Analysis 
2024. ICE. ice.com/insights/sustain -
able-bond-report-2024 .
IEA (2023). Chemicals. International 
Energy Agency. iea.org/energy-system/
industry/chemicals .IISD (2019). Global Chemicals Outlook 
II Chapter Highlight: Overview of the Global 
Chemical Industry. International Institute for 
Sustainable Development. sdg.iisd.org/news/
global-chemicals-outlook-ii-chapter-highlight-
overview-of-the-global-chemical-industry/.
Kortenkamp, A. (2014). Low dose mixture 
effects of endocrine disrupters and their impli-
cations for regulatory thresholds in chemical 
risk assessment . Curr Opin Pharmacol. 
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25244397/ .
Lorbeer, C. and Ezekoye, O. (2024). The 
state of the chemicals industry: Time for bold 
action and innovation. McKinsey & Company. 
mckinsey.com/industries/chemicals/our-in -
sights/the-state-of-the-chemicals-industry-
time-for-bold-action-and-innovation .
MSCI (2024). Global Industry Classifica-
tion Standard (GICS®) Methodology-Guiding 
Principles and Methodology for GICS. MSCI. 
msci.com/indexes/documents/method -
ology/1_MSCI_Global_Industry_Classification_
Standard_GICS_Methodology_20240801.pdf .
MSCI (2025). MSCI ACWI 
Index (USD). MSCI. msci.com/
documents/10199/8d97d244-4685-4200-
a24c-3e2942e3adeb .
Morningstar (2024). Best Performing 
Sustainable Funds in 2024. Morningstar, 
Inc. global.morningstar.com/en-gb/funds/
best-performing-sustainable-funds-in-2024 .
OPIS (2025). No Sign of Recovery 
for Europe Chemical Industry Amid 
High Energy Prices, Tax. OPIS, A Dow 
Jones Company. opis.com/resources/
energy-market-news-from-opis/
no-sign-of-recovery-for-europe-chemical-in -
dustry-amid-high-energy-prices-tax/ .
Pitchbook (2025). European chemicals 
sector’s prolonged slump unsettles investors. 
Jean-Marc Poilpré, Pitchbook. pitchbook.
com/news/articles/european-chemicals-sec -
tors-prolonged-slump-unsettles-investors .
Stoxx (n.d.). STOXX® EUROPE 600 INDEX, 
based on the last periodic review imple -
mentation. STOXX. stoxx.com/document/
Bookmarks/CurrentComponents/SXXGV.pdf .
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector: Policy levers to support viability and increase sustainable finance 28
Contents | ReferencesS&P Global (2025). European plastics 
recycling industry facing collapse: PRE . S&P 
Global, Commodity Insights. spglobal.com/
commodity-insights/en/news-research/
latest-news/chemicals/090125-euro -
pean-plastics-recycling-industry-fac -
ing-collapse-pre.
UNEP (2024a). Chemicals and Waste 
Issues of Concern: A Summary Analysis of 
Stakeholders’ Views. UNEP-UN Environment 
Programme. unep.org/resources/report/
chemicals-and-waste-issues-concern-sum -
mary-analysis-stakeholders-views .
UNEP (2024b). Global Framework on 
Chemicals-For a Planet Free of Harm from 
Chemicals and Waste. UNEP-UN Environ -
ment Programme. unep.org/resources/
global-framework-chemicals-planet-free-
harm-chemicals-and-waste .
UNEP FI (2024a). Advancing Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment: Target 
Setting Guidance for Banks. UNEP FI. unepfi.
org/industries/banking/gender-equality-guid -
ance/.UNEP FI (2024b). Driving Impact on Finan-
cial Health and Inclusion of Individuals and 
Businesses: From Setting Targets to Imple -
mentation. UNEP FI. unepfi.org/industries/
banking/financial-health-inclusion-guidance/ .
UNEP FI (2024c). Navigating Pollution: 
A Blueprint for the Banking Sector. UNEP 
FI. unepfi.org/wordpress/wp-content/
uploads/2024/12/White-Paper-on-Pollution-
UNEP-FI-Nov-2024-D8.pdf .
UNEP FI (2025). A Guide to Transition Plans 
for Banks-The path from targets to imple -
mentation. UNEP FI. unepfi.org/wordpress/
wp-content/uploads/2025/11/47-A-guide-to-
transition-plans-for-banks.pdf .
WHO (2017). Protecting workers’ health . 
World Health Organization. who.int/
news-room/fact-sheets/detail/protect -
ing-workers.
WHO (2025). Biodiversity . World 
Health Organization. who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/biodiversity
Yankovitz, D., Hardin, K., Kumpf, R. and 
Christian, A. (2024). 2025 Chemical Industry 
Outlook. Deloitte Insights. deloitte.com/us/
en/insights/industry/chemicals-and-special -
ty-materials/chemical-industry-outlook.html .
Transitioning the EU Chemical Sector 29
Contents | Contents
unepfi.org

UN Environment Programme Finance Initiative
UNEP Finance Initiative (UNEP FI) brings together 
a large network of banks, insurers and investors 
that catalyses action across the financial system 
to deliver more sustainable global economies.
For more than 30 years the Initiative has been 
connecting the UN with financial institutions 
from around the world to shape the sustainable 
finance agenda establishing the world’s foremost 
sustainability frameworks that help the finance 
industry address global environmental, social and 
governance challenges.
Convened by a Geneva, Switzerland-based 
secretariat, more than 500 banks and insurers are 
individually implementing UNEP FI’s Principles 
for Responsible Banking and Principles for Sustainable Insurance. Financial institutions 
work with UNEP FI on a voluntary basis to 
apply the sustainability frameworks within their 
industries using practical guidance and tools to 
position their businesses for the transition to a 
sustainable and inclusive economy.
Founded in 1992, UNEP FI was the first initiative 
to engage the finance sector on sustainability. 
Today, the Initiative cultivates leadership and 
advances sustainable market practice while 
supporting the implementation of global 
programmes at a regional level across Africa 
& the Middle East, Asia Pacific, Europe, Latin 
America & the Caribbean and North America.
unepfi.org
unepfi.org