A Hydrogen Strategy 
for a climate neutral Europe 
#EUGreenDeal
The EU Hydrogen Strategy will give a boost to clean hydrogen production 
in Europe . Hydrogen can be used as a feedstock , a fuel or an energy 
carrier and storage , and has many possible applications which would re -
duce greenhouse gas emissions across industry, transport, power and buil -
dings sectors. The Commission’s economic recovery plan ‘Next Generation EU’ 
highlights hydrogen as an investment priority to boost economic growth 
and resilience, create local jobs and consolidate the EU’s global leadership. H2
The path towards a European hydrogen eco-system step by step : 
From now to 2024, we will 
support the installation of 
at least 6GW of renewable 
hydrogen electrolysers in 
the EU , and the production 
of up to 1 million tonnes of 
renewable hydrogen. From 2025 to 2030, 
hydrogen needs to become 
an intrinsic part of our 
integrated energy 
system , with at least 40GW 
of renewable hydrogen 
electrolysers and the 
production of up to 
10 million tonnes of 
renewable 
hydrogen in the EU.From 2030 onwards, 
renewable 
hydrogen will be 
deployed at a large 
scale across all 
hard-to-decarbonise 
sectors. 2025 - 2030 Today - 2024 2030 - 
H28 July 2020

To decarbonise our economy we need to promote clean hydrogen 
Our priority is to develop clean, renewable hydrogen, produced using mainly wind and solar energy as 
the most compatible option with the EU’s climate neutrality goal in the long term. However, in the short and 
medium term other forms of low-carbon hydrogen are needed to rapidly reduce emissions from existing 
hydrogen production and support the development of a viable market at a significant scale. 
To target support at the cleanest available technologies , the Commission will work to introduce a 
comprehensive terminology and certification, to define renewable and other forms of hydrogen. It will be 
based on life-cycle carbon emissions, anchored in existing climate and energy legislation, and in line with the 
EU taxonomy for sustainable investments.
 How can hydrogen be promoted in Europe?
• The production of clean hydrogen needs to be increased by creating a 
sustainable industrial value chain .
• We should boost the demand for clean hydrogen coming from industrial 
applications and mobility technolgies. 
• Clean hydrogen needs a supportive framework , well-functioning 
markets and clear rules , as well as dedicated infrastructure and a logistical 
network. 
• Promoting research and innovation in clean hydrogen technologies is 
crucial. 
• Europe we will secure cooperation opportunities with neighboring 
countries and regions of the EU and work to establish a global hydrogen 
market. 
• The European Clean Hydrogen Alliance will help build up a robust pipeline 
of investments.
This strategy, through supporting investment in clean hydrogen, will be 
critical in the context of the recovery from the COVID-19 crisis by creating 
sustainable growth and jobs .