PRESS RELEASE 
Where leading countries stand in the transition to 
renewable heating, road transport and electricity 
 
The sluggish rate of progress made in the energy transition is putting the goal of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions to zero by the middle of the century at risk. On the positive side, 
with early warning indicators guiding timely and targeted interventions, we can accelerate 
progress across several domains. A comparison of four European countries shows that Den-
mark and Norway are making significant strides in transitioning to renewable heating and 
electricity. Norway is also advancing quickly in the road transport sector. The UK and Ger-
many, on the other hand, continue to face several challenges. 
 
Gütersloh, 01.10.2024. If we are to achieve climate neutrality by the middle of the century , 
we cannot afford to overlook interim targets. In the electricity supply sector, for example, the 
energy transition must be completed by 2035. “It is crucial not to rely solely on indicators such as emissions data. We need early warning indicators that can show whether infrastruc-ture is developing appropriately and whether political guidelines and measures are supporting acceleration,” says Christof Schiller, governance expert at the Bertelsmann Stiftung and head of the Sustainable Governance Indicators (S GI) project. 
 The Research Institute for Sustainability - Helmholtz Centre Potsdam (RIFS), in cooperation 
with the Bertelsmann Stiftung, has carried out an international study that applies this compre-hensive analytical approach to the electricity, road transport, and heating sectors. This ap-proach allows for the first -ever comparison of how cl ose countries are to achieving climate 
neutrality, where they are being held back, and what opportunities they have to accelerate progress. “Examining barriers to and catalysts for change is an opportunity for climate action. 
We need to be aware of these things and, moving forward, pay even closer attention to them.” 
 "Systemic change towards zero emissions before mid -century has yet to occur in most coun-
tries", says says Germán Bersalli from the RIFS, " however, examples of pioneering nations in 
various sectors demonstrate that accelerating energy transition is still achievable.” The coun-
try comparison shows that in each sector, at least one country has made substantial headway toward complete emission -free operations. Denmark and Norway are rapidly advancing in 
their transitions to green electricity and heating. Norwa y is also on the verge of completing 
the switch to e -mobility. Germany and the UK still have considerable ground to cover in the 
transition to renewable heating, transportation, and electricity. 
 Biggest barrier to accelerating the energy transition: Power grid expansion 
 Although Germany has made progress in expanding renewable energies, it remains hindered by its underdeveloped power grid infrastructure. Accelerating its progress would involve es-

tablishing official targets for the expansion of distribution grids and electricity storage capaci-
ties, as well as a better alignment of transmission network goals. Denmark, should it continue along its current trajectory, could achieve the phase -out of fossil fuel -based electricity gener-
ation by 2029. Denmark’s ambitious targets for fossil -free energy are aligned with transmis-
sion network expansion. Norway has already fully transitioned to renewable energy for elec-tricity, but still faces the challenge of balancing this with domestic oil production, a key source 
of revenue for the country. The UK requires a clear strategy for phasing out gas production and specific targets for expanding its transmission and distribution networks. 
 Major hurdles to overcome in the road transport transition 
 Given the high prices for electric cars and the end of financial incentives in the sector, a short -
term increase in electric vehicle (EV) adoption in Germany is unlikely. Although the share of internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles in the fleet is declining, the annual reduction rate must increase from 1.6% to 4.2% to achieve emission- free status by 2045. The expansion of 
charging infrastructure is also lagging; despite 17,700 new charging stations being installed in 2022, 124,000 stations per year are needed. Norway leads Europe in terms of e -mobility and 
could achieve a 100% market share of EV sales next year if current trends continue. “Nor-way's progress in e -mobility is based on the fact that the country took early action to provide 
financial incentives for emission -free vehicles,” says Thorsten Hellmann, economics expert at 
the Bertelsmann Stiftung. In contrast, Denmark and the UK lack clear strategies here. 
 Divergent success rates in heating transition 
 Although Germany excels in terms of the energy efficiency of buildings, it must substantially accelerate the phase -out of gas and oil heating if it hopes to get on track with reducing CO2 
emissions and achieving climate neutrality. Germany must escalate it s annual heat pump in-
stallations by nearly twofold to achieve its 2030 goal of 6 million heat pumps . In contrast, 
Norway has nearly fully decarbonized its heating sector and will achieve 100% market cover-age with heat pumps by 2030, though it lacks policy targets for renovating existing buildings. Denmark has proved very successful in transitioning to emission -free heating, having insti-
tuted a ban on oil and gas boilers since 2013. In both countries, the heating transition was fa-cilitated by high fossil fuel taxes and generous state subsidies for households. Additionally, all buildi ngs in both countries will soon be equipped with smart meters. The UK lags significantly 
in the heating transition; CO2 emissions in the construction sect or increased last year, and en-
ergy consumption per square meter in 2021 remained at 2016 levels. 
 
Additional information: 
 The study “Assessing Zero -Emissions Energy Transitions: A Systemic View” study by Bersalli, 
G., Brien, L., Gottheit, D., Lilliestam, J. features a theory -driven approach to evaluation that 
enables the comparison of key indicators for measuring progress in the transition to green en-
ergy across the electricity, heating, and road transport sectors, both within and between countries. The evalu ation framework consists of the following dimensions: (1) policy targets, 

(2) phase- out of fossil -fueled technologies, (3) implementation of new technologies, (4) infra-
structure expansion, and (5) regulatory framework. 
 The Policy Brief “Meeting Climate Targets: How Far have Leading Countries Progressed in 
the Transition to Carbon -free Energy for Heating, Road Transport, and Electricity? by Bersalli, 
G, Schiller, C., Hellmann, T., Mussler, L., Lilliestam, J. presents the key findings of th e study 
and highlights specific opportunities for, and barriers to, policy reform in Denmark, Norway, 
the United Kingdom, and Germany. 
Contact: Dr. Christof Schiller, phone: +49 30 27 57 88 138 
 E-Mail:  -stiftung.de
 
 Dr. Thorsten Hellmann, phone +49 5241 81 81 236 
 E-mail:  stiftung.de 

About the Bertelsmann Stiftung: Inspiring people. Shaping the future. 
The Bertelsmann Stiftung is committed to ensuring that everyone in society can participate in political, economic 
and cultural life. Our programs include Education and the Next Generation, Democracy and Social Cohesion, Digi-talization and the Common Good, Europe’s Future, Health, and Sustainable Social Market Economies. In our work, we focus on people, because people are the drivers of change and can make the world a better place. We share knowledge, promote expertise and develop solutions. A nonprofit fo undation, the Bertelsmann Stiftung was estab-
lished in 1977 by Reinhard Mohn. 
For more information, please visit :  -stiftung.de