Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 01 Background and WWF recommendations 
 
By ratifying the Paris Agreement, Germany has pledged to make its contribution to 
limiting global warming to 1.5°C if possible - and to becoming climate neutral by 2045 
at the latest. Decarbonisation of industry is one of the key tasks in this process. 
Central to these efforts is establishing a green hydrogen economy. How much 
hydrogen will contribute to achieving climate neutrality in the coming decades will be 
determined by the decisions and course set in this decade. The production, import and 
use of hyd rogen as a source of energy are currently the subject of highly political 
debate. 
From WWF’s point of view, the following principles are essential if the structure of the 
hydrogen economy is to benefit the climate and the natural environment: 
 
• Recommend ation 1: Only green hydrogen is truly climate -friendly in the long 
run. Green hydrogen must be ramped up now - with the highest priority being the 
expansion of renewable forms of energy . 
• Recommendation 2: Hydrogen may only be used for applications where no 
reasonable alternatives (e.g. direct electrification) exist and where there is 
significant potential for reducing GHG emissions. The rule of thumb is: efficiency 
first . 
• Recommendation 3: In addition to economic criteria, comprehensive climate, 
environmental and social sustainability criteria must also be applied to the 
production of hydrogen. 
• Recommendation 4: Hydrogen purchase agreements should be introduced 
at national, European and in ternational level to ensure long -term supply and price 
stability. 
• Recommendation 5: Public funds may not be channelled into subsidising blue 
hydrogen , as otherwise lock -in effects could arise until well beyond 2030. 
• Recommendation 6: Comprehensive clim ate criteria in green public 
procurement should be introduced to increase the demand for green hydrogen. 
• Recommendation 7: Grid and infrastructure planning must be geared towards 
climate -friendly investments in infrastructure and preventing stranded 
asse ts. Background paper 
Recommendations for a climate -
friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
Publication subtitle 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 02 Recommendation 1: Only green hydrogen is truly climate -friendly in the long 
run. Green hydrogen must be ramped up now - with the highest priority being 
the expansion of renewable forms of energy. 
 
The production of green hydrogen is based on a chemica l process called electrolysis 
which uses electricity from renewable energy and water. With the current German 
electricity mix, hydrogen in this process has a carbon intensity of 16t CO 2/tH 2. 
“Sustainable” hydrogen is defined in current European legislation as having a 
maximum intensity of 3t CO 2/tH 2.1 Hydrogen produced from today’s electricity mix is 
therefore not climate -friendly and actually generates more emissions than grey 
hydrogen, which is based on the fossil fuels natural gas or coal. Only green hy drogen 
produced from renewable energy by means of electrolysis is virtually CO 2-free and 
therefore the only form that is truly climate - and environmentally friendly in the long 
term. If 100% renewable electricity were used, the carbon intensity would be 0t 
CO 2/tH 2 (not including upstream emissions). 
This is why, in the long term, only green hydrogen should be produced, supported and 
used, and the ramp -up of green hydrogen should be the focus of the German 
government’s hydrogen policy. At the same time, the availability of hydrogen for 
potential applications in industry must be guaranteed. Industry needs reliable 
planning to guide investments as it shifts its processes to the use of hydrogen. 
The rapid and systematic expansion of renewable energy is a basic 
prerequisite for the ramp -up of green hydrogen. Not only does the electricity 
sector need to be fully decarbonised through renewables, the additional demand for 
renewable electricity also ne eds to be met through the hydrogen economy. 
By way of comparison: According to the study “Klimaneutrales Deutschland bis 2045” 
(Towards a Climate -Neutral Germany by 2045) conducted by Agora Energiewende, 
approx. 265 TWh of hydrogen will be needed in 2045. Assuming that this is 
electrolysis -based green hydrogen with an efficiency loss of approx. 30%, this 
translates into demand for electricity from renewable energy of approx. 345 TWh. This 
stands in contrast to total electricity production from renewable en ergy of 244 TWh in 
Germany in 2022.2 Hydrogen demand will therefore be met by both domestic 
production and imports. 
Without the expansion of renewable electricity generation domestically and globally, 
the hydrogen economy will therefore not be able to gai n momentum. The massive 
expansion of renewable energy must be implemented quickly to ensure a 
successful and climate -friendly ramp -up of the hydrogen economy. 

1  -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=PI_COM:C(2021)2800 / 
 -Assessment -of-
REDII -Delegated -Act-on-Electrolytic -Hydrogen -CO2 -Intensity.pdf. 
2 Fraunhofer ISE (2023): Öffentliche Nettostromerzeugung in Deutschland im Jahr 2022; 
Stromerzeugung_2022.pdf 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 03 Recommendation 2: Hydrogen may only be used for applications where no 
reasonable alternatives (e .g. direct electrification) exist and where there is 
significant potential for reducing GHG emissions. The rule of thumb is: 
efficiency first. 
 
Hydrogen is and will continue to be a scarce resource. For this reason, its 
availability must be prioritised for applications that have significant potential to 
reduce CO 2 emissions and cannot be directly electrified. It should only be used to a 
very limited extent in the building sector or in road transport. 
As part of the reform of the Buildings Energy Act, hydrog en was and is being widely 
discussed as an energy source for heat in buildings. In the coalition agreement, the 
German government set the target that every new heating system is to be operated on 
the basis of at least 65% renewable energy by 1 January 2025 . As a result of the 
Russian war of aggression on Ukraine and the ensuing fossil energy crisis, this target 
was moved forward by one year and will already take effect from 1 January 2024. 
Hydrogen and other “green” gases are expected to be considered a bas ic option for 
meeting the 65% requirement once the Buildings Energy Act is passed. We are clearly 
opposed to this.3 For reasons of efficiency, lack of availability and other conflicts of 
use, hydrogen should be used in the coming years in peak load power plants and other 
areas where electrification is not possible. Particularly in the building sector, the use 
of hydrogen and its derivatives would become a very expensive option as it is. The use 
of hydrogen in the building sector is a financial trap, not on ly from the point of view of 
climate change mitigation, but also from the point of view of consumer protection. In 
the medium and long term, hydrogen will be about twice as expensive as buying and 
using heat pumps in combination with solar technology, for example.4 
Not only in the building sector, but also in the transport sector, the use of hydrogen 
competes directly with electricity solutions. For example, the efficiency of battery -
powered e -mobility is significantly higher (69% overall, compared to 26% for fuel cells 
and 13% for internal combustion engines with e -fuels).5 This is why comparatively 
speaking the most environmentally responsible and economical approach for the 
building and transport sector is the direct use of electricity (efficiency first /electricity 
first), e.g. through heat pumps for heating buildings or electric vehicles for transport. 
In addition, green hydrogen is not yet available on a scale that would be sufficient to 
convert all sectors from fossil fuels to green hydrogen, especial ly since the limited 
capacity of renewable electricity will remain a scarce resource in the future. Hydrogen 
should therefore be available for applications that can only make their processes more 
climate -friendly as a result. 
Wherever possible, priority mu st be given to direct electrification. In some 
areas of application, however, this is not (yet) technically possible, which is why 
 
3 WWF and others (2023): Wasserstoff und grüne Gase im Gebäudesektor?; 
 /fm-wwf/Publikationen -PDF/Klima/wasserstoff -und-gruene -
gase -im-gebaeudesektor.pdf 
4 WWF, BUND, DUH (2023): “H2 -ready: Die Kostenfalle im Gebäude; 
 -wwf/Publikationen -PDF/Klima/h -2-ready -die-kostenfalle -
im-gebaeude.pdf 
5 Agora Verkehrswende (2018): Die zukünftigen Kosten strombasierter synth etischer 
Brennstoffe; Die zukünftigen Kosten strombasierter synthetischer Brennstoffe (agora -
energiewende.de) 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 04 alternatives to the indirect use of renewable energy must be resorted to. This is where 
hydrogen and its derivatives come int o play. 
The use of hydrogen should only be incentivised where more energy -
efficient electricity solutions or alternatives are not available in the long 
term. 
 
Deep dive into the use of hydrogen: 
Many industries are dependent on hydrogen -based derivatives to replace oil and 
gas and their products, in other words, on synthetic basic materials and fuels made 
with green hydrogen. Methane, methanol, ammonia and other products are 
important components i n the future chemical and fuel industries. 
Today, these sectors are still fully or largely dependent on the use of fossil sources: 
83% of all processes in steel production are based on fossil sources, 71% in cement 
production, 87% in chemical production a nd 99.9% in aviation and shipping.6 7 The 
use of hydrogen is necessary for decarbonisation and defossilisation in the 
following sectors: 
Steel production 
The steel industry can drastically reduce its harmful emissions by saying goodbye 
to the coal -based blast furnace process. The new direct reduction process can be 
operated with natural gas; during the blast furnace process, the reducing gases are 
released when coke is heated to high temperatures. This alone would lower 
emissions by 60%. 
If hydrogen is used for the direct reduction process in the blast furnace, no more 
CO 2 emissions are produced. Hydrogen is used in the blast furnace process as a 
reducing a gent for the iron ore. The hydrogen reacts in the process with iron oxides 
to form water vapour. The product is sponge iron which is processed to become 
crude steel in what is called an electric arc furnace. The by -product is water, which 
can be used in tu rn for other processes, enabling a GHG saving of approx. 90%. 
Cement production 
Conventional cement production is one of the most energy -intensive industrial 
processes. 35% of the total emissions from cement production are released during 
the combustion pr ocess and 49% from calcination of the clinker.8 The raw material 
limestone is heated up to very high temperatures (1,450°C to form (cement) 
 
6 Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (BMWK) (2019): Energiewende in 
der Industrie. Potenziale und Wechselwirkungen mit dem Energiesektor; 
 -in-der-industrie -ap2a -
branchensteckbrief -zement.pdf?__blob= publicationFile&v=4. 
7 International PtX Hub/PtX Training (2021), based on IEA (2020): Iron and Steel; 
 -and-steel ; IEA (2020): International shipping ; 
 -shipping ; dena (2019): Feedstocks for the chemical 
industry; 

cal_industry.pdf 
8 WWF (2018): Klimaschutz in der Beton - und Zementindustrie - Hintergrund und 
Handlungsoptionen, p. 13;  -wwf/Publikationen -
PDF/WWF_Klimaschutz_in_der_Beton -_und_Zementindustrie_WEB.pdf. 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 05 clinker. It thus consumes significant amounts of fuel which leads to the high 
energy -related emissions. The chemica l reaction when heating the limestone 
results in the release of CO 2 (calcination). As a result of the high temperatures, 
hydrogen alone cannot be used to completely heat the clinker kilns - but a mixture 
of, e.g. 70% biomass and 20% hydrogen - which would largely eliminate the fossil 
fuels.9 
Emissions are also released as a result of the electricity used for grinding and the 
transport of the raw materials and end products. Overall, there is an average GHG 
potential of 587 kg CO 2-equivalents per tonne of ce ment in Germany.10 Since it has 
not been possible to date to avoid process emissions (in other words, the CO 2 
generated during calcination), carbon capture and storage (CCS) are particularly 
relevant here.11 
In addition, alternative measures for cement p roduction should be used, for 
example, the use of eco -friendly materials such as wood for building, lowering the 
cement content in concrete, the use of renewable energy, recycling, reducing 
transport distances and ambitious climate criteria for awarding pu blic construction 
contracts that lower emissions. 
Chemical industry 
Hydrocarbons are the foundation of the (organic) chemical industry. 74% of the 
raw material basis of the organic chemical industry is based on naphta and other 
petroleum derivatives, 11% o n natural gas, 2% on coal and only 13% on regenerative 
raw materials.12 This means we cannot completely ban hydrocarbons from the 
chemical industry. 
But the chemical industry can break its dependency on petroleum by using 
hydrogen and its derivatives. Tod ay, large molecules present in petroleum are 
broken down in a process called “cracking” in systems known as “crackers”. The 
small units produced in the process are called ethylene and are for all intents and 
purposes the legos of the chemical industry. The wide range of products in the 
chemical industry is gradually formed from ethylene and its modifications. 
Cracking is a very emissions -intensive process and is responsible for more than half 
of emissions harmful to the climate that stem from the chemical i ndustry. It is, 
however, possible, to introduce a new basic component not dependent on 
petroleum, for example, methanol. This can be made from hydrogen and CO 2 and 
would be a more sustainable solution, especially in combination with durability of 
the final products and recycling. 
Aviation and shipping 
 
9 Austrian Ministry for Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and 
Technology (BMK); 
https:// nachhaltigwirtschaften.at/resources/nw_pdf/schriftenreihe/steckbrief_wasserstoff -
zementindustrie_bf.pdf . 
10 WWF (2018): Klimaschutz in der Beton - und Zementindustrie - Hintergrund und 
Handlungsoptionen, p.7;  -wwf/Publikationen -
PDF/WWF_Klimaschutz_in_der_Beton -_und_Zementindustrie_WEB.pdf. 
11 WWF (2018): Wie klimaneutral ist CO2 als Rohstoff | WWF 
12 Florian Ausfelder, Hanna Dura (2019): 2. Roadmap des Kopernikus -Projekts ”Power -to-X”: 
Flexible Nutzung erneuerbarer Ressourcen (P2X). Optionen für ein nachhaltiges 
Energiesystem mit Power -to-X Technologien, p. 36;  -
projekte.de/lw_resource/datapool/systemfiles/elements/files/B0ECE55235C57831E0537E69
5E860A05/live/document /Power -to-X_Roadmap_2.0.pdf 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 06 The transport sector currently uses mainly fuels based on petroleum products 
(94%). Biofuels account for around 4% of the energy needed in the transport sector 
and electricity (mainly through rail transport a nd growing as a result of e -mobility) 
for about 2%. 
When using hydrogen and its derivatives in the transport sector, a fundamental 
distinction can be made between the direct combustion of hydrogen in a fuel cell 
and the combustion of hydrocarbon -based, syn thetic fuels. To date, most advances 
have been made in synthetic fuels in the context of Power -to-X and CCU 
technologies. Assuming CO 2-neutral production with electricity from renewable 
energy, Power -to-Gas/Power -to-Liquid technologies can reduce dependenc e on 
fossil energy sources and thus contribute to climate change mitigation in the 
transport sector. However, these processes are subject to high electricity intensity, 
and the CO 2 does not remain sequestered in the product, but is released again when 
comb usted in an engine.13 
By using direct air capture as a sustainable carbon source, the carbon cycle can be 
closed in the production and combustion of synthetic fuels known as e -fuels. Here, 
too, use should be limited to sectors with no alternatives, i.e. a viation and shipping 
as well as parts of the heavy goods transport sector. 

13 WWF (2018): Wie Klimaneutral ist CO 2 als Rohstoff wirklich: Carbon Capture and 
Utilization;  -projekte/klima -energie/klimaschutz -und-
energiewende -in-deutschland/wie -klimaneutral -ist-co2-als-rohstoff/ 

Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 07 Recommendation 3: In addition to economic criteria, comprehensive climate, 
environmental and social sustainability criteria must also be applied to the 
production of hydrogen. 
 
Germany is and will continue to be an energy -importing country. In the future, a 
significant share of PtX demand will have to be met by imports. International trade in 
PtX products plays a key role in the decarbonisation and defossilisation of various 
sectors in industry and transport and is therefore highly relevant for reaching the 
climate targets and making the energy transition a success. Standardisation of the 
production of hydrogen and its derivatives, e.g. in the form of certification, is the basis 
for ensuring the quality of the hydrogen that is produced, imported or used. It is 
therefore crucial for the success of the hydrogen economy in terms of climate policy to 
establish a definition of green hydrogen that is as internationally accepted as possib le, 
or at least EU wide. 
One milestone is the long -negotiated Renewables Directive II (RED II) on RFNBOs 
(Renewable Fuels of Non -Biological Origin, i.e. renewable hydrogen and its 
derivatives), which establishes sustainability criteria for the transport s ector to meet 
the targets for renewable fuels.14 Under RED II, the European Commission officially 
recognises certification schemes to prove compliance with the targets (known as 
voluntary schemes). The revision of RED II also extends the requirements to other 
sectors. It contains the criteria for electr icity procurement and GHG emissions in two 
delegated acts:15 
• Renewable electricity criteria for RFNBOs (Delegated Act on Art. 27 RED II): 
This is where the criteria for electricity from renewable energy sources for 
RFNBOs are stipulated. 
• Methodology for ca lculating GHG emissions from RFNBOs (Delegated Act on 
Art. 28 RED II): This delegated act sets out the methodology for calculating 
GHG emission reductions for RFNBOs. It also defines the eligible carbon 
sources for hydrogen derivatives. 
The delegated acts establish important basic guidelines for the additionality of 
renewables for procuring electricity for the production of hydrogen. These guidelines 
now need to be transposed into national law. 
However, RED II does not regulate sustainability criteria above and beyond this. 
Especially for hydrogen imports, in addition to economic criteria, comprehensive 
climate, environmental and social sustainability criteria must also be applied. 
Sustainability criteria are crucial for the ramp -up of the green PtX and hydr ogen 
economy, as hydrogen will only be a viable long -term alternative to fossil fuels if it is 
produced and used in a way that takes environmental, social and governance aspects 
into account. 
National and international hydrogen projects, particularly in co untries of the Global 
South, must have a positive impact on local development and on the following 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) from the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda: these 
include SDG 6 (Clean Water), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), SDG 8 (Dec ent 
Work and Economic Growth; this also includes education goals), SDG 9 (Industry, 
 
14 EUR -Lex - 52021PC0557 - EN - EUR -Lex (europa.eu) 
15 A detailed assessment of RED II is not the subject of this paper. 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 08 Innovation and Infrastructure), SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), 
SDG 13 (Climate Action) and SDG 14 (Life Below Water). 
Particularly in international cooper ation, it is therefore necessary to look beyond the 
definition of electricity procurement and GHG reduction. WWF calls for the 
development and enforcement of comprehensive sustainability criteria 
for trade in hydrogen products. These should be codified in particular in the 
import strategy of the German government, which has yet to be developed, and in the 
voluntary schemes of the European Commission. 
 
Deep dive into necessary sustainability criteria: 
The following aspects of sustainability are crucial for i nternational trade in 
hydrogen and its derivatives from WWF’s perspective: 
Climate change mitigation 
• Use of renewable energy/power procurement: The hydrogen economy also 
necessarily means transforming the energy mix (energy transition) - away from 
fossil f uels towards renewable energy. To ensure this shift, the use of renewable 
energy sources, i.e. the origin of the electricity, is crucial. In addition, the 
criteria of location, simultaneity and additionality are relevant for hydrogen 
production to ensure s ystem security and grid stability and compensate for, 
rather than encourage, bottlenecks in the grid. 
• Preserving and expanding national climate action strategies: The 
development of the international hydrogen economy also represents a major 
opportunity for all partner countries, as they can increase their share of 
renewable energy as well as hydrogen. However, this presupposes that no 
negative effects arise in the process, for example the use of renewable electricity 
to export hydrogen, which is removed fro m the country’s own electricity mix. 
Renewable energy must be additionally developed or surplus electricity used. 
• Meeting local energy needs and local hydrogen demand: Hydrogen projects 
must demonstrate that they contribute to meeting local demand and local 
decarbonisation, either with the aim of grid stability in the electricity sector or 
for use in other industrial and transport applications. The development of the 
hydrogen economy must go hand in hand with meeting local energy needs as 
well as local hydrogen demand. 
• Use of a sustainable CO 2 source: The CO 2 required for the production of 
hydrogen derivatives such as e -fuels should be captured exclusively from the air 
or from waste gas streams generated by the use of sustainable biomass. The 
CO 2 cycle must ultimately be closed so that no additional emissions are 
produced. 

Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 

Environment 
• Water availability: Many of the countries or regions predestined for hydrogen 
production are very sunny and often also experience water shortages. Although 
electrolysis does not require a very large amount of water (approx. 9 l per kg of 
H2), water resources that would have to be available to the public for other 
purposes, e.g. as drinking water, for households, other industry and agriculture, 
may not be used. Additional water resources are also needed in cooling and 
other processes. Electrolysis today is based on the use of highly purified 
freshwater.16 Desalination of seawater is also an option. However, strict 
environmental regulations must be met, as harmful chemicals are also used in 
the desalination process and brine c an be deposited in the sea, which in turn 
negatively impacts ecosystems. 
• Land requirements: The development of hydrogen projects will require a large 
amount of land, as areas are needed for the expansion of renewable energy, the 
transport of electricity, w ater and hydrogen, the installation of electrolysers and 
the additional infrastructure required (digital and mobility). These areas may 
compete with other uses, e.g. buildings for local residents, land for agriculture 
or other economic purposes or protecte d ecosystems. The development of 
capacities for the hydrogen economy must not have a negative impact on the 
needs of the population or ecosystems. Areas subject to nature conservation 
should be excluded. Land rights must not be violated. 
• Preserving biodive rsity: The expansion of renewable capacities as well as the 
construction of additional infrastructure and power plants can negatively 
impact ecosystems. Projects and plants must be planned and built with nature 
conservation in mind. Proof must be provided that the land use has no 
significant residual impacts on biodiversity and agricultural land. 
Social aspects 
• Human rights and fair working conditions Top priority must be given to the 
socially responsible design of hydrogen projects, i.e. respect for human rights 
and fair working conditions. This includes health aspects, fair wages, safety and 
respect for human rights. It is essential that the UN Charter on Human Rights 
is respected. 
• Participation and local value creation To foster acceptance of hydrogen 
projects in society, transparent communication and participation of the local 
community are necessary. In addition to adequate feedback mechanisms on the 
consequences for the local community, involving local residents can also 
contribute to capacity -building . The expansion of infrastructure must not only 
 
16 National Hydrogen C ouncil (2021): Nachhaltigkeitskriterien für Importprojekte von 
erneuerbarem Wasserstoff und PtX -Produkten, p. 5; 
 .wasserstoffrat.de/fileadmin/wasserstoffrat/media/Dokumente/NWR_Positions
papier_Nachhaltigkeitskriterien.pdf. 

Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 10 be in the interest of the project, it also has to be in the interest of the local 
community, e.g. by creating jobs and providing better access to electricity. 
• Indigenous tribes and resettlement: As described above, a lot of land is 
required for the production of renewable energy and the allocation of 
electrolysers. In most cases, land is used that is sparsely populated, often by 
indigenous tribes. The development of hydrogen projects must involve the local 
com munity throughout the entire process (keyword Free, Prior and Informed 
Consent) and must not result in involuntary resettlement. In the case of 
voluntary resettlement, fair compensation and improvement of living 
conditions must be guaranteed. 
Governance is also crucial for implementation. Sustainable projects and regulations 
must be based on structures and procedures that are independent and enable 
transparency and participation and prevent corruption. Access to information is 
particularly important. 
Based on these factors, suitable instruments should be developed by various 
stakeholders (policymakers, academia, business, civil society) that can be used 
internationally. The involvement of local stakeholders is key. Many of these factors, as 
well as certifica tion projects, are currently being discussed in some places, but 
comprehensive certification and a practical roadmap for implementation are still 
lacking. 
 
Recommendation 4: Hydrogen purchase agreements should be introduced at 
national, European and international level to ensure long -term supply and 
price stability. 
 
Long -term power purchase agreements (PPAs) are becoming increasingly popular in 
the renewable energy sector as a means of long -term financing and risk minimisation 
for both plant operators and large industrial consumers. These long -term contracts - 
called hydrogen purchase agreements (HPAs) - are just as suitable for the hydrogen 
economy. They guarantee plant operators the advantage of securing long -term 
financing of the investment through a guaranteed purchase quantity over a long 
period of time (more than 10 years). This is particularly relevant in the ramp -up of 
hydrogen and the transformation phase of industry. For the industrial customer, the 
advantage is that the long -term supply of green hydrogen is ensured on the one hand 
and protected against price fluctuations in the market on the other. 
The H2Global project has been offering hydrogen power agreements since 2022 with a 
funding volume of 900 million euros and compensates the difference between the 
supply and purchase prices with subsidies (double au ction model). The project aims to 
promote the market launch of renewable hydrogen.17 Currently, H2Global only 
promotes hydrogen production in third countries outside the EU. The European 
Commission is currently developing more auctions based on the H2Globa l model. To 
also harness the hydrogen potential in Germany and Europe and minimise transport 
 
17 H2Global Foundation (2023): Objective of the H2Global instrument; The H2Global 
Instrument (h2 -global.de) 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 11 routes, a proposal should also be made that goes beyond this. Hydrogen purchase 
agreements should also be introduced for national and European 
production with the aim of a rapid and climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -
up. In this context, support must be limited to the import of green hydrogen. 
 
Recommendation 5: Public funds may not be channelled into subsidising fossil 
structures and blue hydrogen, as otherwise lock -in effects could arise until well 
beyond 2030. 
 
Germany issued a joint declaration with Norway on 16 March 2022, stating that it 
would import blue hydrogen from Norway for a transitional period, the duration of 
which is not further defined. Promoting imports of blue hydrogen jeopardises the 
achievement of the Paris climate targets in the long term. Public funding of blue 
hydrogen is a misallocation of financial resources that poses the danger of a fossil 
lock -in, because it encourages more natural gas product ion and creates infrastructure 
that is no longer needed in a climate -neutral energy system. The National Hydrogen 
Strategy, which has already been announced several times, should contain a dedicated 
roadmap to accelerate the development of a green hydrogen economy that ensures the 
achievement of climate targets. 
Importing or even promoting blue hydrogen hinders this ramp -up, because scarce 
resources are channelled into supporting fossil technologies. Only green hydrogen 
produced with additional or otherwis e derived renewable energy makes the necessary 
contribution to climate change mitigation. Since, like green hydrogen, blue hydrogen 
would only be available in relevant quantities in a few years’ time, it cannot function 
as a transitional solution, but woul d instead intensify fossil lock -in effects. 
Carbon Contracts for Difference must also not promote blue hydrogen in 
the long term, as this can lead to longer -term lock -in effects. 
The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action has adopted t he 
funding guideline on Carbon Contracts for Difference (CCfDs). Interested companies 
can already submit their requirements. CCfDs provide industry with the necessary 
investment and planning security and support basic industries in decarbonising their 
very energy - and emission -intensive processes and procedures and in boosting 
investments in climate -friendly technologies. In this case, CCfDs ensure that climate -
friendly technologies can compete with conventional technologies. The transformation 
will require significant investments in the coming years. To avoid an investment 
backlog, industry must start investing now. There is momentum for action, because 
the need for modernisation in the industry is very high: industry has a reinvestment 
need of approx. 50% of industrial plants by 2030.18 
Currently, the funding programme still includes a subsidy for blue hydrogen. In the 
long term, however, Carbon Contracts for Difference may only be used for 
the promotion of green hydrogen, as only this will pay for signific ant 
 
18 Agora Verkehrswende (2021): Klimaneutrales Deutschla nd 2045. Wie Deutschland seine 
Klimaziele schon vor 2050 erreichen kann, p.12;  -
energiewende.de/veroeffentlichungen/klimaneutrales -deutschlan d-2045. 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 12 emission reductions. Technologies that are based on fossil fuels should not be 
financed from public funds. 
Furthermore, the widely used term “H2 readiness” for gas -fired power plants, import 
terminals, pipelines and other infrastructure must be precise ly defined. This term is 
mentioned in the National Hydrogen Strategy, the coalition agreement, the LNG 
Acceleration Act, the EU taxonomy and in state aid legislation, among others, but is 
not clearly stipulated anywhere. It can make sense to build H2 -ready infrastructure 
and power plants, provided that no better alternatives are available and they 
contribute to the climate targets. However, this requires specifications and guidelines 
with regard to the technical requirements for subsequent retrofitting, for the 
retrofitting costs and an actual and controllable roadmap for retrofitting, including the 
phase -out for fossil energy sources. The term “H2 readiness” needs to be 
defined swiftly and unambiguously so that the right course can be set for 
climate change mitigation. 
 
Recommendation 6: Comprehensive climate criteria in green public 
procurement should be introduced to increase the demand for green 
hydrogen. 
 
A sustainable transformation of public procurement can provide powerful leverage for 
climate change mitigation and support the creation of green lead markets. Public 
procurement in Germany alone has an annual investment volume of 500 billion 
euros.19 So far, however, the criterion of cost -effectiveness is still the primary factor 
when awarding contracts, and decisions are not made based on climate benefits. This 
needs to change. 
The introduction of clear requirements in public procurement (green public 
procurement - GPP), as well as the introduction of quotas and standards, can 
stimulate demand for low -emission products like green steel. The design of GPP can 
take different forms. For example, governments can impose minimum requirements 
or preferential purchasing requirements for zero -emission steel that is subject to a 
certain greenhouse gas (GHG) emissio ns benchmark. A CO 2 limit could be introduced 
as a requirement or standard for certain products or materials that may be used for 
public procurement. Another possible model would be the introduction of mandatory 
CO 2 life cycle criteria to assess new projec ts. It would be conceivable to apply these 
criteria at national and European level. Combining both instruments would certainly 
be advisable. 
Under the general administrative regulation (Allgemeine Verwaltungsvorschrift, AVV) 
on the procurement of climate -friendly services (AVV Klima), which came into force 
on 1 January 2022, a step in the right direction has already been taken at federal level: 
among other things, a “negative list” of services not to be procured was integrated, 
which covers particularly cl imate -relevant products. In addition, the German 
government has announced that it will introduce minimum quotas for climate -
friendly products for public procurement. 
 
19 Fischer, Andreas/Küper, Malte (2021): Green Public Procurement. Potenziale einer 
nachhaltigen Beschaffung, IW -Policy Paper, No. 23; 
 -
Policy -Paper_2021 -Green -Public -Procurement.pdf. 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 
 13 This means that the legal framework is in place. However, rigorous implementation is 
yet to come and must now follow. WWF advocates for the introduction of quotas as 
well as criteria in public procurement with the aim of making public procurement 
demand more sustainable. This is intended to create market incentives for CO 2-free 
materials with a view to establishing a market for green products in the long term. The 
government must play a pioneering role in these efforts. Climate criteria must be 
comprehensively applied when awarding public construction contracts so 
that green public procurement is rigorously implemented. 
 
Recommendation 7: Grid and infrastructure planning must be geared towards 
climate -friendly investments in infrastructure and preventing stranded assets. 
 
Hydrogen and its derivatives can be transported in different ways: as gas via pipelines, 
as liquid hydrogen (under very high pressure) in tanks by trucks or ships, with liquid 
hydrogen organic carriers (LOHC) or also as ammonia or other hydrocarbons (e.g. 
methanol or other synthetic fuels). 
Each form of transport has advantages and disadvantages. Pipelines are the lowest -
cost option, but are only suitable up to a length of a few thousand kilometres due to 
diffusion and costs.20 In addition, it must be taken into account whether, for example, 
the electrolyser for offshore plants is situated near the plants or on land. Liqui d 
hydrogen can be transported over longer distances, but storage is cost -intensive due to 
high pressure and very low temperatures.21 LOHC, i.e. organic compounds that can 
absorb and release hydrogen through chemical reaction with a catalyst, are promising, 
but still in development and relatively cost -intensive as a result. 
Investments in infrastructure must always be aligned with the goal of climate 
neutrality. Stranded assets, i.e. assets that lose value before the end of their (planned) 
useful life or lea d to new liabilities, must be prevented. For example, pipeline 
infrastructure that will probably no longer be useful in 20 -30 years must not be built 
today to avoid creating misguided incentives or sunk costs, i.e. irreversible costs. 
Infrastructure must b e considered in terms of the goal, not the status quo. 
To coordinate infrastructure development, planning for decades of investment is 
essential. Structured national and European hydrogen network planning is still in its 
early stages. Electricity, natural gas and hydrogen infrastructure must be planned in 
tandem. It is important that the planning process is transparent and easy to 
understand, and that it is designed, implemented and monitored by an independent 
body in order to avoid any special interests a nd to take climate targets fully into 
account in the planning process. 
Integrated and independent planning of the electricity and gas grid 
infrastructure must be implemented in such a way that the hydrogen 
infrastructure is aligned with the actual needs o f producers and 
consumers. 
 
20 European Hydrogen Backbone (2021): Analysing future demand, supply and transport; 
EHB#2_report_part1_21061 4.indd (gasforclimate2050.eu) 
21 E3G (2021): E3G Hydrogen Factsheet Infrastructure;  -
wpengine.netdna -ssl.com/wp -content/uploads/E3G_2021_Hydrogen -
Factsheet_Infrastructure.pdf. 
 
Recommendations for a climate -friendly hydrogen ramp -up 

Publisher © WWF Germany, July 2023 
Authors Ulrike Hinz, Lisa -Maria Okken (WWF Germany) 
Collaborators Viviane Raddatz, Sebastian Breer (WWF Germany) 
Contact  ,  
Lobbying Register No. R001579