ELI:  1/77DIRECTIVE (EU) 2023/2413 OF THE EUR OPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 18 Oct ober 2023
amending Directiv e (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and Directiv e 98/70/EC as regards 
the promotion of energy from renewable sources, and repealing Council Directiv e (EU) 2015/652 
THE EUR OPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUR OPEAN UNION,
Havi ng regar d to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Articles 114, 192(1) and 194(2) 
thereof,
Havi ng regar d to the proposal from the European Commission,
After transmission of the draf t legislative act to the national parliaments,
Havi ng regar d to the opinions of the European Economic and Social Committee (1),
Havi ng regar d to the opinion of the Committ ee of the Regions (2),
Acting in accordance with the ordinar y legislative procedure (3),
Whereas:
(1) In the cont ext of the European Green Deal, set out in the communication from the Commission of 11 December 
2019 (the ‘European Green Deal’), Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (4)
established the objective of climat e neutrality in the Union by 2050 and an intermediate target of a reduction of net 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55 % compare d to 1990 levels by 2030. The Union’s climat e neutrality 
objective requires a just energy transition which leav es no territory or citizen behind, an increase in energy 
efficiency and signif icantly higher shares of energy from renewable sources in an integrat ed energy syste m.
(2) Renewable energy plays a fundamental role in achieving those objectives, given that the energy sector currently 
contr ibut es over 75 % of total greenhouse gas emissions in the Union. By reducing those greenhouse gas emissions, 
renewable energy can also contr ibute to tackli ng challeng es related to the environment, such as the loss of 
biodiversity , and to reducing pollution in line with the objectives of the Commission communication of 12 May 
2021 , entitled ‘Pathwa y to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: “Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Water and 
Soil”’ . The green transition to a renewable energy based economy will help to achieve the objectives of Decision 
(EU) 2022/591 of the European Parliament and of the Council (5), whic h also aims to protect, restore and impro ve 
the state of the environment by, inter alia, halting and reversing biodiversity loss. The fact that renewable energy 
reduces exposure to price shocks compare d to fossil fuels can give renewable energy a key role in tackling energy 
poverty. Renewable energy can also bring broad socioeconomic benefi ts, creating new jobs and fosteri ng local 
industr ies while addressing growing domestic and global demand for renewable energy technology .
(1)OJ C 152, 6.4.2022, p. 127 and OJ C 443, 22.11.2022, p. 145.
(2)OJ C 301, 5.8.2022, p. 184.
(3)Position of the European Parliament of 12 September 2023 (not yet published in the Official Jour nal) and decision of the Council of 
9 October 2023.
(4)Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing the framewo rk for achieving 
climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, 
p. 1).
(5)Decision (EU) 2022/591 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 Apr il 2022 on a General Union Environment Action 
Programme to 2030 (OJ L 114, 12.4.2022, p. 22).
Offi cial Jour nal 
of the European Union EN 
L series 
2023/2413 31.10.2023
ELI:  2/77(3) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (6)sets a binding overall Union targe t to 
reach a share of at least 32 % of energy from renewable sources in the Union’s gross final consump tion of energy by 
2030. Unde r the 2030 Climat e Target Plan, set out in the Commission communication of 17 Sept ember 2020 , 
entitled ‘Stepping up Europe’s 2030 climate ambition: Investing in a climat e-neutral future for the benefit of our 
people’, the share of renewable energy in gross final consump tion of energy would need to increase to 40 % by 
2030 in order to achi eve the Union’s greenhouse gas emissions reduction targe t. In that context, in July 2021, as 
part of the packag e deliver ing on the European Green Deal, the Commission proposed to double the share of 
renewable energy in the energy mix by 2030, compar ed to 2020, to reach at least 40 %.
(4) The general context created by Russia’s inva sion of Ukraine and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a 
surge in energy prices across the Union, thus highlighting the need to accelerat e energy efficiency and increase the 
use of renewable energy in the Union. In order to achieve the long-t erm objective of an energy system that is 
independent of third countr ies, the Union should focus on accelerating the green transition and ensur ing an 
emission-reducing energy policy that reduces dependence on imported fossil fuels and that promotes fair and 
affordable prices for Union citizens and under takings in all sectors of the econom y.
(5) The REP owerEU Plan set out in the Commission communication of 18 May 2022 (the ‘REP owerEU Plan’) aims to 
make the Union independent from Russian fossil fuels well before 2030. That communication provid es for the 
front-loading of wind and solar energy , increasing the averag e deplo yment rate of such energy as well as for 
additional renewable energy capacity by 2030 to accommodate the higher production of renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin. It also invit ed the co-legislator s to consider establishing a higher or earlier target for the increased 
share of renewable energy in the energy mix. In that context, it is appropr iate to increase the overall Union 
renewable energy target to 42,5 % in order to signif icantly accelerat e the current pace of deplo yment of renewable 
energy , thereby accelerating the phase-out of the Union’s dependence on Russian fossil fuels by increasing the 
availability of affordable, secure and sustainable energy in the Union. Beyond that mandatory level, Member States 
should endeav our to collectively achieve an overall Union renewable energy target of 45 % in line with the 
REP owerEU Plan.
(6) The renewable energy targe ts should go hand-in-hand with the compl ementar y decarbonisation efforts on the basis 
of other non-f ossil energy sources towards reach ing climate neutrality by 2050. Member States should be able to 
combine different non-f ossil energy sources in order to achi eve the objective of the Union to become climate 
neutral by 2050, taking into account their specif ic national circumstances and the structure of their energy supply . 
In order to achi eve that objective, the deplo yment of renewable energy in the framewor k of the increased binding 
overall Union target should be integrat ed into complementary decarbonisation efforts involving the development of 
other non-f ossil energy sources that Member States decide to pursue.
(7) Innovatio n is key to the competitiveness of renewable energy . The European Strategic Energy Technology Plan set 
out in the Commission communication of 15 Sept ember 2015 , entitled ‘Towards an Integrated Strategic Energy 
Techn ology (SET) Plan: Accelerating the European Energy System Transf ormation (the ‘SET -Plan’) aims to boost the 
transition towards a climate neutral energy syste m through actions for research and innovati on, which address the 
whole innovati on chain, from research to mark et uptak e. In their integrated national energy and climat e plans 
submitted pursuant to Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council (7), 
Member States set national objectives and funding target s for public and, where available, private researc h and 
innovati on relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropr iate, a timeframe for when the objectives should 
be met ; reflecting the priorities of the Energy Union Strategy set out in the Commission communication of 
25 Febr uary 2015 , entitled, ‘A Framew ork Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-Looking Climate 
(6)Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy 
from renewable sources (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82).
(7)Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governa nce of the Energy 
Union and Climate Action, amending Regulations (EC) No 663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council, Directives 94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of the European 
Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  3/77Change Policy’, and, where relevant, of the SET-Plan. To compl ement their national objectives and funding target s, to 
promote the production of renewable energy from inno vative renewable energy technology and to safeg uard the 
continued leadership of the Union in research and development of inno vative renewable energy technology , each 
Member State should set an indicative targe t for innovative renewable energy technology of at least 5 % of newly 
installed renewable energy capacity by 2030.
(8) In accordance with Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2023/1791 of the European Parliament and of the Council (8)and in 
line with Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/1749 (9), Member States should take an integrat ed approac h by 
promoting the most energy efficient renewable source for any given sector and application, as well as by promoting 
system efficiency , so that the least energy is required for any given economic activity .
(9) The amendments set out in this Directive are also intende d to suppor t the achieve ment of the Union’s target of an 
annual production of sustainable biomethane of 35 billion cubic meters by 2030, set out in the Commission staff 
working document of 18 May 2022 accompan ying the REP owerEU Plan, entitled ‘Implementing the Repowe r EU 
Action Plan: Investment needs, hydrog en accelerator and achieving the bio-methane targets’, thereby suppor ting 
secur ity of supply and the Union’s climat e ambitions.
(10) There is growing recognition of the need to align bioenergy policies with the principle of the cascading use of biomass. 
That principle aims to achieve the resource efficien cy of biomass use by prioritising, wherever possible, the material use 
of biomass over its energy use, thus increasing the amount of biomass available within the system. Such an alignment is 
intended to ensure fair access to the biomass raw material market for the development of innovative, high value-added 
bio-based solutions and a sustainable circular bioeconomy . When developing suppor t schemes for bioenergy , Member 
States should theref ore take into consideration the available supply of sustainable biomass for energy and non-energy 
uses and the mainte nance of the national forest carbon sink s and ecosyste ms, as well as the principle of the circular 
econom y, the principle of the cascading use of biomass and the waste hierarc hy established in Directive 2008/98/EC 
of the European Parliament and of the Council (10). In line with the principle of the cascading use of biomass, woo dy 
biomass should be used according to its highest economic and environmental added value in the follow ing order of 
priorities: wood -based products, exten ding the service life of wood-based products, re-use, recy cling, bioenergy and 
disposal. Where no other use for woody biomass is economically viable or environmentally appropr iate, energy 
recovery helps to reduce energy generation from non-renewable sources. Member States’ suppor t schemes for 
bioenergy should theref ore be direct ed to such feedst ocks for which little mark et comp etition exists with the mater ial 
secto rs, and whose sourcing is considered positive for both climat e and biodiversity , in order to avoid negative 
incentives for unsustainable bioenergy pathwa ys, as identifi ed in the 2021 repor t of the Commission’s Joint Researc h 
Centre, entitled ‘The use of woody biomass for energy production in the EU’.
At the same time, in imp lementing measures ensur ing the application of the principle of the cascading use of 
biomass, it is necessar y to recognise the national specifi cities which guide Member States in the design of their 
suppor t schem es. Member States should be allowed to deroga te from that principle in duly justif ied circumstances, 
for example where required for secur ity of energy supply purposes, such as in the case of particularly severe cold 
conditions. Member States should also be allowed to derog ate from that principle where there are no industr ies or 
processing facilities that could mak e higher added value use of certain feedstoc ks within a geographical perimeter . 
In such a case, transpor t beyond that perimeter for the purpose of such a use might not be justif ied from an 
economic or environmental point of view . Member States should notify any such derogat ions to the Commission. 
Member States should not grant direct financial suppor t for the production of energy from saw logs, veneer logs, 
industr ial grade roundwoo d, stumps and roots. For the purpose of this Directive, tax benefi ts are not considered to 
(8)Directive (EU) 2023/1791 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 Sept ember 2023 on energy efficiency and amending 
Regulation (EU) 2023/955 (OJ L 231, 20.9.2023, p. 1).
(9)Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/1749 of 28 September 2021 on Energy Efficiency First: from principles to practice - 
Guidelines and examples for its implement ation in decision-making in the energy sector and beyond (OJ L 350, 4.10.2021, p. 9).
(10)Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on wast e and repealing certain Directives 
(OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  4/77be direct financial suppor t. Waste prevention, reuse and recy cling of wast e should be the priority option. Member 
State s should avoid creating suppor t sche mes which would be count er to targets on treatment of waste and which 
would lead to the ineffi cient use of recy clable waste. Moreover , in order to ensure more efficient use of bioenergy , 
Member State s should not grant new suppor t or renew any suppor t for electr icity-only plants, unless the 
installations are locat ed in regions with a specifi c use status as regards their transition awa y from fossil fuels or in 
the outermost regions referred to in Article 349 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), or 
the installations use carbon captur e and storag e.
(11) The rapid growth and increasing cost-competitiveness of renewable electr icity production can be used to satisfy a 
growing share of the demand for energy , for instance using heat pum ps for space heating or low-temperature 
industr ial processes, electr ic vehicles for transpor t, or electr ic furnaces in certain industr ies. Renewable electr icity 
can also be used to produce synthetic fuels for consump tion in hard-to -decarbonise transpor t sectors such as 
aviation and mar itime transpor t. A framewor k for electr ification needs to enable robust and efficient coordination 
and expand mark et mecha nisms to match both supply and demand in space and time, stimulate investments in 
flexibility , and help integrat e large shares of variable renewable energy generation. Member States should theref ore 
ensure that the deplo yment of renewable electr icity continues to increase at an adequate pace to meet growin g 
demand. To that end, Member State s should establish a framewor k that includes mark et-compatible mechanisms to 
tackle the remaining barriers to having secure and adequat e electr icity systems fit for a high level of renewable 
energy , as well as storage facilities fully integrat ed into the electr icity system . In particular , that framewor k should 
tackle the remaining barriers, including non-fi nancial ones such as the lack, on the part of author ities, of sufficient 
digital and human resources to process a growing number of permit applications.
(12) When calculating the share of renewable energy in a Member State , renewable fuels of non-biological origin should 
be counted in the sector where they are consumed (electr icity , heating and cooling, or transpor t). To avoid double- 
counting, the renewable electr icity used to produce those fuels should not be counted. That would result in a 
harmonisation of the accounting rules for those fuels throughout Directive (EU) 2018/2001, regardl ess of whether 
they are counted for the overall renewable energy target or for any sub-target. It would also allow the real energy 
consumed to be counted, taking account of energy losses in the process to produce those fuels. Moreover , it would 
allow renewable fuels of non-biological origin imported into and consumed in the Union to be counte d. Member 
State s should be allowed to agree, via a specifi c cooperation agreement, to count the renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin consumed in a given Member State towards the share of gross final consump tion of energy from 
renewable sources in the Member State where they were produced. Where such cooperation agreements are put in 
place, unless agreed other wise, Member States are encourag ed to count the renewable fuels of non-biological origin 
that are produced in a Member State other than the Member States where they are consumed as follows: up to 70 % 
of their volume in the countr y where they are consumed and up to 30 % of their volume in the countr y where they 
are produced. Agreements between Member States can take the form of a specific cooperation agreement made via 
the Union’s renewable development platf orm, launc hed on 29 November 2021 .
(13) Cooperation between Member States to promot e renewable energy can take the form of statistical transfer s, suppor t 
schem es or joint projects. It allows for a cost-efficient deplo yment of renewable energy across Europe and 
contr ibut es to mark et integration. Despite its pote ntial, cooperation between Member States has been very limit ed, 
thus leading to subopt imal results in term s of efficiency in increasing renewable energy . Member States should 
theref ore be oblig ed to establish a framework for cooperation on joint projects by 2025. Within such a framework, 
Member States should endea vour to establish at least two joint projects by 2030. In addition, Member States whose 
annual consum ption of electr icity excee ds 100 TWh should endea vour to establish a third joint project by 2033. 
Projects financed by national contr ibutions under the Union renewable energy financing mech anism established by 
Commission Imple menting Regulation (EU) 2020/1294 (11)would meet that oblig ation for the Member States 
involved.
(11)Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294 of 15 Sept ember 2020 on the Union renewable energy financing mechanism 
(OJ L 303, 17.9.2020, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  5/77(14) In its Communication of 19 November 2020 , entitled ‘An EU Strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable 
energy for a climat e neutral future’, the Commission introduced an ambitious objective of 300 GW of offshore wind 
and 40 GW of ocean energy across all the Union’s sea basins by 2050. To ensure that step chang e, Member States 
will need to work together across borders at sea-basin level. Regulation (EU) 2022/869 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council (12)requires the Member States to conclude non-binding agreements to cooperat e on goals for 
offshore renewable energy generation to be deplo yed within each sea basin by 2050, with intermediate steps 
in 2030 and 2040. Publishing information on the volumes of offshore renewable energy that the Member States 
intend to achieve through tenders increases transparency and predictability for investors and suppor ts the 
achi evement of the goals for offshore renewable energy generation. Mar itime spatial planning is an essential tool to 
ensure the coexistence of differ ent uses of the sea. Allocating space for offshore renewable energy projects in 
mar itime spatial plans is needed to enable long-term planning, to assess the impact of those offshore renewable 
energy projects and to ensure public acceptance of their planned deplo yment. Enabling the participation of 
renewable energy communities in joint projects on offshore renewable energy provides a further means by whic h to 
enhance public acceptance.
(15) The mark et for renewables power purchase agreements is rapidly growing and provides a compl ementar y route to 
the market of renewable generation in addition to suppor t schem es by Member States or to selling directly on the 
wholesale electr icity mark et. At the same time, the mark et for renewables power purchase agreements is still limite d 
to a small number of Member States and large under takings, with signif icant administrative, technical and financial 
barriers remaining in large parts of the Union’s mark et. The existing measures provi ded for in Article 15 of 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001 to encourag e the uptak e of renewables power purchas e agreements should theref ore be 
strengthened further , by explor ing the use of credit guarant ees to reduce the financial risks of such agreements, 
taking into account that those guarant ees, where public, should not crowd out private financing. In addition, 
measures in suppor t of renewables power purchase agreements should be extended to other forms of renewable 
energy purchas e agreements, including, where relevant, renewables heating and cooling purchase agreements. In 
that cont ext, the Commission should analyse the barriers to long-ter m renewable energy purchase agreements, in 
particular to the deplo yment of cross-border renewable energy purch ase agreements, and issue guidance on the 
remo val of those barriers.
(16) Further streamlining of administrative permit-granting procedures may be needed to eliminate unnecessar y 
administrative burdens for the purpose of establishing renewable energy projects and related grid infrastr ucture 
projects. Within two years of the entr y into force of this Directive and on the basis of the integrat ed national energy 
and climate progress repor ts submitted pursuant to Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, the Commission 
should consider whether additional measures are needed to further suppor t the Member State s in the 
imp lementation of the provi sions of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 regulating permit-granting procedures, including in 
view of the requirement of the contact points set up or designated pursuant to Article 16 of that Directive to ensure 
the fulfilment of the deadlines for the permit-granting procedures set out in that Directive. It should be possible for 
such additional measures to include indicative key performance indicators on, inter alia, the length of permit- 
granting procedures regarding renewable energy projects locat ed in and outside renewables acceleration areas.
(17) Buildings have a large untapped potential to contr ibute effectively to the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in 
the Union. The decarbonisation of heating and cooling in buildings through an increased share in production and 
use of renewable energy will be needed to meet the ambition provided for in Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 to achi eve 
the Union objective of climat e neutrality . However , progress on the use of renewable energy for heating and cooling 
has been stagnant over the last decade, largely relying on increased use of biomass. Without the establishment of 
indicative shares of renewable energy in buildings, it will not be possible to track progress and identify bottlenecks 
in the uptak e of renewable energy . The establishment of indicative shares of renewable energy in buildings provid es 
a long-term signal to invest ors, including for the period immediate ly after 2030. Theref ore, indicative shares for the 
(12)Regulation (EU) 2022/869 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2022 on guidelines for trans-European energy 
infrastr ucture, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2009, (EU) 2019/942 and (EU) 2019/943 and Directives 2009/73/EC and 
(EU) 2019/944, and repealing Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 (OJ L 152, 3.6.2022, p. 45).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  6/77use of renewable energy in buildings that is produced on-site or nearby as well as renewable energy taken from the 
grid should be set to guide and encourage Member States’ efforts to exploit the poten tial of using and producing 
renewable energy in buildings, encourage the development of technology whic h produces renewable energy and 
helps the efficient integration of such technology in the energy system , while provi ding certainty for invest ors and 
local level engag ement as well as contr ibuting to system efficiency . Smar t and innovati ve technology that 
contr ibut es to system efficiency should also be promot ed where appropr iate. For the calculation of those indicative 
shares, when determining the share of renewable electr icity taken from the grid used in buildings, Member States 
should use the averag e share of renewable electr icity supplied in their territory in the two previous years.
(18) The indicative Union share of renewable energy in the building sector to be reached by 2030 constitut es a necessar y 
minimum milestone for ensur ing the decarbonisation of the Union’s building stoc k by 2050 and compl ements the 
regulatory framework related to energy efficiency and the energy performa nce in buildings. It is key to enabling a 
seamless, cost-effective phase out of fossil fuels from buildings to ensure their replacement by renewable energy . 
The indicative share of renewable energy in the building sector compl ements the regulatory framew ork for 
buildings pursuant to Union law on the energy performa nce of buildings by ensur ing that renewable energy 
technology , appliances and infrastr uctures, including efficient distr ict heating and cooling, are suffi ciently scaled-up 
in a timely manner to replace fossil fuels in buildings and to ensure the availability of a safe and reliable renewable 
energy supply for nearly zero-energy buildings by 2030. The indicative share of renewable energy in the building 
sector also promote s renewable energy investments in long-t erm national building renovation strateg ies and plans, 
thereby enabling the achievement of the decarbonisation of buildings. Further more, the indicative share of 
renewable energy in the building sector provides an impor tant additional indicator to promote the development or 
moder nisation of efficient distr ict heating and cooling netw orks, thereby compl ementing both the indicative distr ict 
heating and cooling target under Article 24 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and the requirement to ensure that 
renewable energy and waste heat and cold from efficient distr ict heating and cooling systems are available to help 
cover the tota l annual primar y energy use of new or renovat ed buildings. That indicative share of renewable energy 
in the building sector is also necessar y to ensure the cost-effe ctive achievement of the annual increase in renewable 
heating and cooling pursuant to Article 23 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
(19) Given the large energy consum ption in residential, commercial and public buildings, existing definitions provid ed 
for in Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (13)could be used in the 
calculation of the national share of energy from renewable sources in buildings as to minimise the administrative 
burden whilst ensur ing progress in realising the Union’s indicative share of renewable energy in the building sector 
by 2030.
(20) Lengthy administrative permit-granting procedures are one of the key barriers to investment in renewable energy 
projects and their related infrastr ucture. Those barriers include the complexity of the applicable rules for site 
selection and administrative author isations for such projects, the compl exity and duration of the assessment of the 
environmental impact of such projects, and related energy networks, grid-connection problems, constraints on 
adapt ing technology specifi cations during the permit-granting procedure, and staffing problems of the permit- 
granting author ities or grid operators. In order to accelerat e the pace of deplo yment of such projects it is necessar y 
to adopt rules which would simplify and shor ten permit-granting procedures, taking into account the broad public 
acceptance of the deplo yment of renewable energy .
(21) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 streamlines the administrative permit-granting procedures for renewable energy plants by 
introducing rules on the organisation and maximum duration of the administrative part of the permit-granting 
procedure for renewable energy projects, cover ing all relevant permits to build, repower and operate renewable 
energy plants, and for the connection of such plants to the grid.
(13)Regulation (EC) No 1099/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 Octo ber 2008 on energy statistics (OJ L 304, 
14.11.2008, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  7/77(22) A further simplification and shor tening of the administrative permit-granting procedures for renewable energy 
plants, including energy plants which combine different renewable energy sources, heat pumps , co-locat ed energy 
storag e, including power and ther mal facilities, as well as the assets necessar y for the connection of such plants, 
heat pumps and storage to the grid and to integrate renewable energy into heating and cooling netw orks in a 
coordinat ed and harmonised manner , is necessar y in order to ensure that the Union reach es its ambitious climat e 
and energy targe ts for 2030 and the objective of climate -neutrality by 2050, while taking into account the ‘do no 
harm’ principle of the European Green Deal and without prejudice to the internal division of compet ences within 
Member States.
(23) The introduction of shor ter and clear deadlines for decisions to be taken by the author ities compet ent for granting 
permits for the renewable energy installations on the basis of a compl ete application is intended to accelerat e the 
deplo yment of renewable energy projects. The time taken to build the renewable energy plants and their grid 
connections should not be count ed towards those deadlines, excep t when it coincides with other administrative 
steps in the permit-granting procedure. It is appropr iate, however , to make a distinction between projects locat ed in 
areas that are particularly suitable for the deplo yment of renewable energy projects, for which deadlines can be 
streamlined, namely renewables acceleration areas, and projects located outside such areas. The particular ities of 
offshore renewable energy projects should be taken into account when setting those deadlines.
(24) Some of the most common problems faced by renewable energy project developers relate to compl ex and length y 
administrative permit-granting and grid-connection procedures established at national or regional level and a lack 
of suffi cient staffing and technical exper tise in permitting author ities to assess the environmental impact of the 
proposed projects. Theref ore, it is appropr iate to streamline certain environmental-related aspects of the permit- 
granting procedures for renewable energy projects.
(25) Member State s should suppor t the faster deplo yment of renewable energy projects by carrying out a coordinat ed 
mapping for the deplo yment of renewable energy and related infrastr ucture in their territory in coordination with 
local and regional author ities. Member States should identify the land, surface, sub-surface and sea or inland water 
areas necessar y for the installation of renewable energy plants and relat ed infrastr ucture in order to meet at least 
their national contr ibutions towards the revised overall renewable energy targe t for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001 and in suppor t of reaching the objective of climate neutrality by 2050 at the lates t, in 
accordance with Regulation (EU) 2021/1119. Member States should be allowed to use existing spatial planning 
documents for the purpose of identifying those areas. Member States should ensure that such areas reflect their 
estimate d traject ories and total planned installed capacity and should identify specifi c areas for the diffe rent types of 
renewable energy technology provided for in their integrated national energy and climate plans submitted pursuant 
to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The identif ication of the required land, surface, sub-sur face, 
and sea or inland water areas should take into consideration in particular the availability of energy from renewable 
sources and the pote ntial offered by the differ ent land and sea areas for renewable energy production of the 
differ ent types of technology , the projected demand for energy , taking into account energy and system efficiency , 
overall and in the different regions of the Member State, and the availability of relevant energy infrastr ucture, 
storag e, and other flexibility tools bear ing in mind the capacity needed to cater for the increasing amount of 
renewable energy , as well as environmental sensitivity in accordance with Annex III to Directive 2011/92/EU of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (14).
(26) Member States should designat e as a sub-set of those areas, specifi c land (including surfaces and sub-surfaces) and sea 
or inland water areas as renewables acceleration areas. Those areas should be particularly suitable for the purpose of 
developing renewable energy projects, differentiating between types of technology , on the basis that the deplo yment 
of the specifi c type of renewable energy source is not expect ed to have a significant envi ronmental impact. In the 
designation of renewables acceleration areas, Member State s should avoid prot ected areas and consider restoration 
plans and appropr iate mitig ation measures. Member States should be able to designat e renewables acceleration 
areas specifi cally for one or more types of renewable energy plants and should indicate the type or types of energy 
from renewable sources that are suitable to be produced in such renewables acceleration areas. Member States 
(14)Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the effects of certain 
public and private projects on the environment (OJ L 26, 28.1.2012, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  8/77should designate such renewables acceleration areas for at least one type of technology and should decide the size of 
such renewables acceleration areas, in view of the specificities and requirements of the type or types of technology 
for whic h they set up renewables acceleration areas. In doing so, Member State s should aim to ensure that the 
combined size of those areas is signif icant and that they contr ibut e to the achieve ment of the objectives set out in 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
(27) The multiple use of space for renewable energy production and other land, inland water and sea uses, such as food 
production or nature prot ection or restoration, alleviates the constraints on land, inland water and sea use. In that 
conte xt, spatial planning is an essential tool with whic h to identify and steer synergies for land, inland water and sea 
use at an early stage. Member States should explore, enable and favour multiple uses of the areas identif ied as a result 
of the spatial planning measures adopt ed. To that end, Member State s should facilitate changes in land and sea use 
where required, provided that the different uses and activities are compat ible with one another and can co-exist.
(28) Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (15)establishes environmental assessments as 
an important tool with which to integrat e environmental considerations into the preparation and adop tion of plans 
and programmes. In order to designat e renewables acceleration areas, Member States should prepare one or more 
plans that encompass the designation of renewables acceleration areas and the applicable rules and mitig ation 
measures for projects located in each of those areas. Member State s should be able to prepare a sing le plan for all 
renewables acceleration areas and renewable energy technology , or technology-specific plans whic h designat e one 
or more renewables acceleration areas. Each plan should be subject to an envi ronmental assessment pursuant to 
Directive 2001/42/EC in order to assess the impact of each renewable energy technology on the relevant areas 
designate d in that plan. Carrying out an environmental assessment pursuant to that Directive for that purpose 
would allow Member States to have a more integrat ed and efficient approac h to planning, to ensure public 
participation at an early stage, and to take environmental considerations into account at an early phase of the 
planning process at a strateg ic level. That would contr ibut e to ram ping up the deplo yment of differ ent renewable 
energy sources in a faster and more streamlined manner , while minimising the adverse environmental effects from 
those projects. Those environmental assessments should include transboundar y consultations between Member 
State s if the plan is likely to have significant adverse effects on the environment in another Member State.
(29) Following the adoptio n of the plans designating renewables acceleration areas, Member States should monitor any 
signif icant adverse envi ronmental effects of the implementation of plans and programmes in order , inter alia, to 
identify , at an early stage, unforeseen adverse effects and to be able to under take appropr iate remedial action, in 
accordance with Directive 2001/42/EC.
(30) To increase public accept ance of renewable energy projects, Member States should take appropr iate measures to 
promote the participation of local communities in renewable energy projects. The provis ions of the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Europe Convention on access to information, public participation in decision-making 
and access to justice in environmental matte rs(16), signed in Aarhus on 25 June 1998 , in particular the provisions 
relating to public participation and to access to justice, remain applicable.
(31) In order to streamline the process of designation of renewables acceleration areas and avoid duplication of 
environmental assessments of a sing le area, it should be possible for Member States to declare areas which have 
already been designat ed as suitable for an accelerat ed deplo yment of renewable energy technology under national 
law as renewables acceleration areas. Such declarations should be subject to certain environmental conditions, 
ensur ing a high level of environmental prot ection. The possibility of designation of renewables acceleration areas in 
existing planning should be limited in time, in order to ensure that it does not jeopardise the standard process for 
designation of renewables acceleration areas. Projects locat ed in existing national designated areas in protect ed areas 
which cannot be declared as renewables acceleration areas should continue to operat e under the same conditions 
under which they were established.
(15)Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the effects of certain plans 
and programmes on the environment (OJ L 197, 21.7.2001, p. 30).
(16)OJ L 124, 17.5.2005, p. 4.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  9/77(32) Renewables acceleration areas, together with existing renewable energy plants, future renewable energy plants 
outside such areas and cooperation mechani sms, should aim to ensure that renewable energy production will be 
suffi cient to achi eve Member States’ contr ibution to the overall Union renewable energy target set in Article 3(1) of 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001. Member States should retain the possibility to grant permits for projects outside such 
areas.
(33) In the renewables acceleration areas, renewable energy projects that compl y with the rules and measures identif ied in 
the plans prepared by Member States, should benefit from a presump tion of not having signif icant effects on the 
environment. Theref ore, such projects should be exem pt from the oblig ation to carry out a specific environmental 
imp act assessment at project level within the meaning of Directive 2011/92/EU, with the excep tion of projects 
where Member State has deter mined to require an envi ronmental impa ct assessment in its national mandatory list 
of projects and of projects whic h are likely to have signif icant effects on the environment in another Member State 
or where a Member State that is likely to be signif icantly affect ed so requests. The oblig ations under the Convention 
on envi ronmental impact assessment in a transboundar y conte xt(17), signed in Espoo on 25 Febr uary 1991 , should 
remain applicable to Member State s where the project is likely to cause a signif icant transboundar y impact in a third 
countr y.
(34) The oblig ations set out in Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (18)remain 
applicable regar ding hydropo wer plants, including where a Member State decides to designat e renewables 
acceleration areas related to hydropower , with a view to ensur ing that a pote ntial adverse impact on the water body 
or wate r bodies concer ned is justified and that all relevant mitig ation measures are implement ed.
(35) The designation of renewables acceleration areas should allow renewable energy plants and co-locate d energy 
storag e, as well as the connection of such plants and storage to the grid, to benefi t from predictability and 
streamlined administrative permit-granting procedures. In particular , projects locat ed in renewables acceleration 
areas should benefit from accelerat ed administrative permit-granting procedures, including a tacit approval in the 
case of a lack of reply by the compe tent author ity on an intermediar y administrative step by the established 
deadline, unless the specifi c project is subject to an environmental impact assessment or where the principle of 
administrative tacit approval does not exist in the national law of the Member State concer ned. Those projects 
should also benefi t from clear deadlines and legal certainty as regards the expected outcome of the permit-granting 
procedure. Once an application for a project in a renewables acceleration area is submitted , the Member State 
should carry out a fast screening process with the aim of identifying whether the project is highly likely to give rise 
to signif icant unforeseen adverse effects in view of the environmental sensitivity of the geographical area where it is 
locat ed and which were not identif ied during the environmental assessment of the plans designating renewables 
acceleration areas carried out pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC and whether the project falls within the scope of 
Article 7 of Directive 2011/92/EU on the basis of the likelihood of its having signif icant effects on the environment 
in another Member State or on the basis of a request of a Member State which is likely to be significantly affect ed. For 
the purpose of such a screening process, the compet ent author ity should be able to request the applicant to provid e 
additional available information without requir ing a new assessment or data collection.
All projects locat ed in renewables acceleration areas that comply with the rules and measures identif ied in the plans 
prepared by Member States should be deemed to be approved at the end of such a screening process. Provide d that 
Member States have clear evidence to consider that a specif ic project is highly likely to give rise to such signif icant 
unforeseen adverse effects, Member States should, follo wing such a screening process, subject the project to an 
environmental impact assessment pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU and, where relevant, an assessment pursuant 
to Council Directive 92/43/EEC (19). Member States should provide reasons for their decisions to subject projects to 
such assessments before those assessments are carried out. Such assessments should be carried out within six 
months of such decisions, with the possibility of extending that deadline on the ground of extraordinar y 
circumstances. It is appropr iate to allow Member States to introduce derogat ions from the oblig ation to carry out 
(17)OJ L 104, 24.4.1992, p. 7.
(18)Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community 
action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1).
(19)Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conser vation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, 
22.7.1992, p. 7).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  10/77such assessments for wind and solar photo voltaic projects in justif ied circumstances, because such projects are 
expecte d to provid e a vast majority of the renewable electr icity by 2030. In such a case, the project developer 
should adopt propor tionate mitig ation measures or, if not available, compensat ory measures, which , if other 
propor tionat e compensat ory measures are not available, may take the form of monetar y compensation, in order to 
address those significant unforeseen adverse effects identified during the screening process.
(36) In view of the need to accelerate the deplo yment of energy from renewable sources, the designation of renewables 
acceleration areas should not prevent the ongoing and future installation of renewable energy projects in all areas 
available for renewable energy deplo yment. Such projects should remain subject to the obligation to carry out a 
dedicate d environmental impa ct assessment pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU and should be subject to the permit- 
granting procedures applicable to renewable energy projects locat ed outside renewables acceleration areas. To speed 
up permit-granting procedures on a scale necessar y for the achi evement of the renewable energy target set out in 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001, also the permit-granting procedures applicable to projects outside renewables 
acceleration areas should be simplified and streamlined with the introduction of clear maximum deadlines for all 
steps of the permit-granting procedure, including dedicated environmental assessments per project.
(37) The constr uction and operation of renewable energy plants can result in the occasional killing or disturbance of 
birds and other species protect ed under Directive 92/43/EEC or under Directive 2009/147/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council (20). However , such killing or disturbance of prot ected species should not be 
considered to be deliberate within the meaning of those Directives if the project for the constr uction and operation 
of those renewable energy plants provid es for appropr iate mitig ation measures to avoid such killing, to prevent 
disturbance, to assess the effectiveness of such measures through appropr iate monitoring and, in the light of the 
information gathered, to take further measures as required to ensure that there are no signif icant adverse impact on 
the population of the species concer ned.
(38) In addition to installing new renewable energy plants, repower ing of existing renewable energy power plants has 
signif icant potential to contr ibut e to the achi evement of the renewable energy targets . Since the existing renewable 
energy power plants have, for the most part, been installed in sites with signif icant renewable energy source 
poten tial, repo wering can ensure the continued use of those sites while reducing the need to designate new sites for 
renewable energy projects. Repoweri ng includes further benefits such as the existing grid connection, a likely higher 
degree of public accepta nce and kno wledge of the environmental impact.
(39) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 introduces streamlined permit-granting procedures for repowe ring. In order to respond 
to the increasing need for the repowe ring of existing renewable energy power plants and to mak e full use of the 
advantage s it offers, it is appropr iate to establish an even shor ter permit-granting procedure for the repowe ring of 
renewable energy power plants locat ed in renewables acceleration areas, including a shor ter screening process. For 
the repo wering of existing renewable energy power plants locat ed outside renewables acceleration areas, Member 
State s should ensure a simplified and swif t permit-granting procedure not exceed ing one year, while taking into 
account the ‘do no harm’ principle of the European Green Deal.
(40) In order to further promote and accelerat e the repo wering of existing renewable energy power plants, a simplified 
permit-granting procedure for grid connections should be established where the repowe ring results in a limited 
increase in total capacity compared to the original project. The repowe ring of renewable energy projects entails 
changes to or the exte nsion of existing projects to diffe rent degrees. The permit-granting procedure, including 
environmental assessments and screening, for the repowe ring of renewable energy projects should be limite d to the 
poten tial impact resulting from the change or extension compare d to the original project.
(20)Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conser vation of wild birds 
(OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  11/77(41) When repowe ring a solar installation, increases in efficiency and capacity can be achieved without increasing the 
space occupied. The repowe red installation thus does not have a diffe rent impa ct on the environment than the 
original installation, provided that the space used is not increased in the process, and the originally required 
environmental mitig ation measures continue to be complied with.
(42) The installation of solar energy equipment and related co-locat ed energy storag e, as well as the connection of such 
equipment and storage to the grid, in existing or future artificial structures creat ed for purposes other than solar 
energy production or energy storag e with the excl usion of artifici al wate r surfaces, such as roof tops, parking areas, 
roads and railwa ys, do not typically raise concer ns related to competing uses of space or envi ronmental impact. It 
should theref ore be possible for those installations to benefi t from shor ter permit-granting procedures and be 
exem pt from the oblig ation to carry out an environmental impact assessment pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU, 
while allowing Member State s to take into account specifi c circumstances relating to the protection of cultural or 
histo rical heritage, national defence interests, or safety reasons. Self-consum ption installations, including those for 
collective self-consumers, such as local energy communities, also contr ibute to reducing overall demand for natural 
gas, to increasing resilience of the system and to achieving the Union’s renewable energy targe ts. The installation of 
solar energy equipment with a capacity below 100 kW, including installations of renewables self-consumers, is not 
likely to have significant adverse effects on the envi ronment or the grid and does not raise safety concer ns. In 
addition, small installations do not generally require capacity expansion at the grid-connection point. In view of the 
immediate positive effects of such installations for consumers and the limited environmental impa ct they may give 
rise to, it is appropr iate to further streamline the permit-granting procedure applicable to them, provided that they 
do not exceed the existing capacity of the connection to the distr ibution grid, by introducing the concep t of 
administrative positive silence in the relevant permit-granting procedures in order to promot e and accelerat e the 
deplo yment of those installations and to be able to reap their benefi ts in the shor t term. Member States should be 
allowe d to apply a threshold lower than 100 kW on the basis of their internal constraints, provided that the 
threshold remains higher than 10,8 kW.
(43) Heat pump technology is key to producing renewable heating and cooling from ambient energy , including from 
wastewa ter treatment plants and geother mal energy . Heat pumps also allow the use of waste heat and cold. The 
rapid deplo yment of heat pumps whic h mobilises under used renewable energy sources such as ambient energy or 
geother mal energy , as well as wast e heat from industr ial and tertiary sectors, including data centres, make s it 
possible to replace natural gas and other fossil fuel-based boilers with a renewable heating solution, while increasing 
energy efficiency . That will accelerat e a reduction in the use of gas for the supply of heating, in buildings as well as in 
industr y. In order to accelerat e the installation and use of heat pumps, it is appropr iate to introduce targe ted shor ter 
permit-granting procedures for such installations, including a simplified permit-granting procedure for the 
connection of smaller heat pumps to the electr icity grid where there are no safety concer ns, no further works are 
needed for grid connections and there is no technical incompatibility of the system compo nents, unless no such 
permit-granting procedure is required by national law. Thanks to a quic ker and easier installation of heat pump s, 
the increased use of renewable energy in the heating sector , whic h accounts for almost half of the Union’s energy 
consum ption, is intende d to contr ibut e to secur ity of supply and help tackle a more difficult market situation.
(44) For the purposes of the relevant Union envi ronmental law, in the necessar y case-b y-case assessments to ascer tain 
whether a renewable energy plant, the connection of that plant to the grid, the relat ed grid itself or storage assets 
are of overriding public interest in a particular case, Member States should presume those renewable energy plants 
and their related infrastr ucture to be of over riding public interest and serving public health and safety , excep t where 
there is clear evidence that those projects have signif icant adverse effects on the envi ronment which cannot be 
mitig ated or compen sated for, or where Member State s decide to restr ict the application of that presump tion in duly 
justif ied and specifi c circumstances, such as reasons related to national defe nce. Consider ing such renewable energy 
plants to be of over riding public interest and serving public health and safety would allow such projects to benefit 
from a simplified assessment.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  12/77(45) In order to ensure a smooth and effective implementation of the provi sions laid down in this Directive, the 
Commission suppor ts Member States by means of the Techn ical Suppor t Instr ument established by Regulation 
(EU) 2021/240 of the European Parliament and of the Council (21), whic h provides tailor -made technical exper tise 
to design and implement reforms, including those increasing the use of energy from renewable sources, fostering 
bette r energy system integration, identifying specifi c areas particularly suitable for the installation of renewable 
energy plants, and streamlining the framewor k for author isation and permit-granting procedures for renewable 
energy plants. The technical suppor t, for example, involves strengthening of administrative capacity , harmonising 
the legislative framew orks, and the shar ing of relevant best practices such as enabling and favouring multiple uses.
(46) Energy infrastr ucture needs to be in place to suppor t the signif icant scaling up of renewable energy generation. 
Member States should be able to designate dedicat ed infrastr ucture areas where the deplo yment of grid or storage 
projects that are necessar y to integrat e renewable energy into the electr icity system is not expect ed to have a 
signif icant environmental imp act, such an impact can be duly mitig ated or, where not possible, compensat ed for. 
Infrastr ucture projects in such areas may benefit from more streamlined environmental assessments. If Member 
State s decide not to designat e such areas, the assessments and rules applicable under Union envi ronmental law 
remain applicable. In order to designat e infrastr ucture areas, Member States should prepare one or more plans, 
including by means of national legislation, encom passing the identification of the areas and the applicable rules and 
mitig ation measures for projects locat ed in each infrastr ucture area. The plans should clearly indicate the scope of 
the dedicated area and the type of infrastr ucture projects covered. Each plan should be subject to an envi ronmental 
assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC in order to assess the impact of each type of project on the relevant 
designate d areas. Grids projects in such dedicat ed infrastr ucture areas should avoid to the extent possible Natura 
2000 sites and areas designat ed under national protect ion schemes for nature and biodiversity conser vation, unless, 
due to the specif icities of grid projects, there are no propor tionat e alternati ves for the deplo yment of such projects. 
When assessing propor tionality , Member States should take into account the need to ensure the economic viability , 
the feasibility and the effective and accelerated implementation of the project with a view to ensur ing that the 
additional generation capacity of renewable energy deplo yed can be promp tly integrated into the energy system, or 
whether infrastr ucture projects of various types already exist in the specifi c Natura 2000 site or prote cted area, 
which would allow to bundle differ ent infrastr ucture projects in a site resulting in lowe r environmental impact.
Dedicat ed plans for storage projects should alwa ys exclude Natura 2000 sites since there are less constraints on 
where to place them. In such areas, Member States should, under justified circumstances including where needed to 
accelerat e the grid expansion to suppor t the deplo yment of renewable energy to achieve the climate and renewable 
energy targets, be able to introduce exem ptions from certain assessment oblig ations provided for in Union 
environmental law under certain conditions. If Member State s decide to make use of such exem ptions, the specific 
projects should be subject to a streamlined screening process similar to the screening process provided for 
renewables acceleration areas, which should be based on existing data. Requests of the compet ent author ity to 
provid e additional available information should not require a new assessment or data collection. If such a screening 
process identif ies projects that are highly likely to give rise to significant unforeseen adverse effects, the compet ent 
author ity should ensure that appropr iate and propor tionate mitig ation measures, or if not available, compen satory 
measures, are applied. In the case of compensat ory measures, the project development can be pursued while 
compen satory measures are being identif ied.
(47) Insuffi cient numbers of skilled work ers, in particular installers and designers of renewable heating and cooling 
systems , slows down the replacement of fossil fuel heating systems by renewable energy based syste ms and is a 
signif icant barrier to integrating renewable energy in buildings, industr y and agriculture. Member State s should 
cooperate with social partners and renewable energy communities to anticipate the skills that will be needed. A 
suffi cient number of high-quality and effective upskilling and reskilling strateg ies and training programmes and 
certification possibilities that ensure proper installation and reliable operation of a wide range of renewable heating 
and cooling system s and storag e technology , as well as electr ic vehicles recharging points, should be made available 
(21)Regulation (EU) 2021/240 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 Febr uary 2021 establishing a Technical Suppor t 
Instr ument (OJ L 57, 18.2.2021, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  13/77and designed in a way to attract participation in such training programmes and certification system s. Member States 
should consider what actions should be taken to attract groups currently under -represente d in the occupational 
areas in question. A list of trained and certified installers should be made publicly available to ensure consumer 
trust and easy access to tailored installer and designer skills guarant eeing proper installation and operation of 
renewable heating and cooling.
(48) Guarant ees of origin are a key tool for consumer information as well as for the further uptak e of renewable energy 
purchas e agreements. It should theref ore be ensured that the issue, trade, transfer and use of guarantees of origin 
can be carried out in a unif orm system with appropr iately standardised certificates that are mutually recognised 
throughout the Union. Further more, to provide access to appropr iate suppor ting evidence for persons concluding 
renewable energy purch ase agreements, it should be ensured that any associated guarantees of origin can be 
transferr ed to the buyer . In the conte xt of a more flexible energy syste m and growin g consumer demand there is a 
call for a more innovative, digital, technologically advanced and reliable tool to suppor t and document the 
increasing production of renewable energy . To facilitat e digital inno vation in that field, Member State s should, 
where appropr iate, enable issuing guarant ees of origin in fractions and with a closer to real time timestamp. In view 
of the need to impro ve consumer empo werment and contr ibute to a higher share of renewable energy in the gas 
supply , Member States should require netw ork gas suppliers who disclose their energy mix to final consumers, to 
use guarantees of origin.
(49) Infrastr ucture development for distr ict heating and cooling netw orks should be stepped up and steered towards 
harnessing a wider range of renewable heat and cold sources in an efficient and flexible way in order to increase the 
deplo yment of renewable energy and deepen energy system integration. It is theref ore appropr iate to update the list 
of renewable energy sources that distr ict heating and cooling netw orks should increasing ly accommodat e and to 
require the integration of ther mal energy storage as a source of flexibility , greater energy efficiency and more cost- 
effective operation.
(50) With more than 30 million electr ic vehicles expected in the Union by 2030 it is necessar y to ensure that they can 
fully contr ibute to the system integration of renewable electr icity , and thus allow reaching higher shares of 
renewable electr icity in a cost-op timal manner . The pote ntial of electr ic vehicles to absorb renewable electr icity at 
times when it is abundant and feed it back into a grid when there is scarcity , contr ibuting to the system integration 
of variable renewable electr icity while ensur ing a secure and reliable supply of electr icity , has to be fully utilised. It is 
theref ore appropr iate to introduce specific measures on electr ic vehicles and information about renewable energy 
and about how and when to access it which compl ement those in Regulations (EU) 2023/1804 (22)and 
(EU) 2023/1542 (23)of the European Parliament and of the Council.
(51) Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council (24)and Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (25)require Member States to allow and foster the participation of demand 
response through aggreg ation, as well as to provide for dynamic electr icity price contracts to final custom ers where 
applicable. In order to allow demand response more easily to provide further incentives for the absor ption of green 
electr icity , it needs to be based not only on dynamic prices but also on signals about the actual penetration of green 
electr icity in the system. It is theref ore necessar y to impro ve the signals that consumers and mark et participants 
receive regar ding the share of renewable electr icity and the intensi ty of greenhouse gas emissions of the electr icity 
supplied, through the dissemination of dedicat ed information. Consump tion patter ns can then be adjusted on the 
(22)Regulation (EU) 2023/1804 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 Sept ember 2023 on the deplo yment of alternative 
fuels infrastr ucture, and repealing Directive 2014/94/EU (OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, p. 1).
(23)Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 concer ning batteries and wast e batteries, 
amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC (OJ L 191, 28.7.2023, p. 1).
(24)Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for electr icity 
(OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 54).
(25)Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market for 
electr icity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 125).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  14/77basis of renewable energy penetration and the presence of zero carbon electr icity , in conjunction with an adjustment 
made on the basis of price signals. That serves the objective of further suppor ting the deplo yment of innovative 
business models and digital solutions, which have the capacity to link consump tion to the level of renewable energy 
in the electr icity grid and thus provide incentives for the right network investments to under pin the clean energy 
transition.
(52) In order for flexibility and balancing services from the aggrega tion of distr ibut ed storag e assets to be developed in a 
competitive manner , real-time access to basic batter y information such as state of health, state of charge, capacity 
and power set point should be provided under non-discr iminato ry terms, in accordance with the relevant data 
prote ction rules and free of charge to the owners or users of the batt eries and the entities acting on their behalf, 
such as building energy system managers, mobility service provid ers and other electr icity mark et participants. It is 
theref ore appropr iate to introduce measures that address the need of access to such data for facilitating the 
integration-r elated operations of domestic batter ies and electr ic vehicles, that complement the provisions on access 
to batte ry data related to facilitating the repur posing of batter ies laid down in Regulation (EU) 2023/1542. The 
provisions on access to the batt ery data of electr ic vehicles should apply in addition to any provisions laid down in 
Union law on the type approval of vehicles.
(53) The increasing number of electr ic vehicles in road, rail, mar itime and other transpor t modes will require recharging 
operations to be optimised and manag ed in a way that does not cause congestion and takes full advantage of the 
availability of renewable electr icity and low electr icity prices in the system. Where smar t and bi-directional 
rech arging would assist further penetration of renewable electr icity by electr ic vehicle fleets in the transpor t sector 
and in the electr icity system in general, such functionality should also be made available. In view of the long life 
span of recharging points, requirements for recha rging infrastr ucture should be kept updated in a way that would 
cater for future needs and would not result in negativ e lock-in effects to the development of technology and services.
(54) Rechar ging points where electr ic vehicles typically park for extende d periods of time, such as where people park for 
reasons of residence or emplo yment, are highly relevant to energy syste m integration. Smar t and, where appropr iate, 
bi-directional recharging functionalities theref ore need to be ensured. In that regard, the operation of non-publicly 
accessible normal recharging infrastr ucture is particularly impor tant for the integration of electr ic vehicles in the 
electr icity system as it is locat ed where electr ic vehicles are park ed repeatedly for long periods of time, such as in 
buildings with restr icted access, emplo yee parking or parking facilities rente d out to natural or legal persons.
(55) Demand response is pivotal to enabling the smar t recharging of electr ic vehicles and thereby enabling the efficient 
integration of electr ic vehicles into the electr icity grid, whic h will be crucial for the process of decarbonising 
transpor t and for the purposes of facilitating energy syste m integra tion. In addition, Member States should 
encourage , where relevant, initiatives promoting demand response through interoperability and data exchang e for 
heating and cooling systems, ther mal energy storag e units and other relevant energy related devices.
(56) Electr ic vehicle users enter ing into contractual agreements with electromobility service provid ers and electr icity 
mark et participants should have the right to receive information and explanations on how the terms of the 
agreement will affect the use of their vehicle and the state of health of its batt ery. Electromobility service providers 
and electr icity market participants should explain clearly to electr ic vehicle users how they will be remunerated for 
the flexibility , balancing and storag e services provided to the electr icity system and mark et by the use of their 
electr ic vehicle. Electr ic vehicle users also need to have their consumer rights secured when entering into such 
agreements, in particular regar ding the prote ction of their personal data such as location and driving habits, in 
connection to the use of their vehicle. Electr ic vehicle users’ pref erence regarding the type of electr icity purchased 
for use in their electr ic vehicle, as well as other prefe rences, can also be part of such agreements. For those reasons, 
it is important to ensure that the rech arging infrastr ucture deplo yed is used as effectively as possible. In order to OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  15/77imp rove consumer conf idence in e-mobility , it is essential that electr ic vehicle users can use their subscr iption at 
multiple recharging points. That will also allow the electr ic vehicle user ’s service provider of choice to optimally 
integrat e the electr ic vehicle in the electr icity syste m, through predictable planning and incentives on the basis of 
electr ic vehicle user preferen ces. That is also in line with the principles of a consumer -centr ic and prosumer -based 
energy syste m, and the right of supplier choice of electr ic vehicle users as final customers as per the provisions of 
Directive (EU) 2019/944.
(57) Distr ibut ed storage assets, such as domestic batte ries and batter ies of electr ic vehicles have the poten tial to offer 
considerable flexibility and balancing services to the grid through aggreg ation. In order to facilitate the 
development of such devices and services, the regulatory provisions concer ning connection and operation of the 
storag e assets, such as tariffs, commitment times and connection specifi cations, should be designed in a way that 
does not hamp er the poten tial of all stora ge assets, including small and mobile ones and other devices for exam ple, 
heat pumps, solar panels and ther mal storag e, to offer flexibility and balancing services to the system and to 
contr ibut e to the further penetration of renewable electr icity , in comparison with larger, stationar y storage assets. In 
addition to the general provisions preventing market discr imination laid down in Regulation (EU) 2019/943 and 
Directive (EU) 2019/944, specific requirements should be introduced to address holistically the participation of 
those assets and to remove any remaining barriers and obstacles to unleash the potential of such assets to help the 
decarbonisation of the electr icity system and empo wer the consumers to actively participat e in the energy transition.
(58) As a general principle, Member States should ensure a level playing field for small, decentralised electr icity 
generation and storag e systems, including through batter ies and electr ic vehicles, so they are able to participate in 
the electr icity markets, including cong estion management and the provision of flexibility and balancing services in 
a non-discr iminato ry manner as compared to other electr icity generation and stora ge system s, and without 
dispropor tionat e administrative or regulator y burden. Member States should encourage self-consumers and 
renewable energy communities to actively participate in those electr icity mark ets by provi ding flexibility services 
through demand response and storag e including through batte ries and electr ic vehicles.
(59) Industr y accounts for 25 % of the Union’s energy consum ption, and is a major consumer of heating and cooling, 
which is currently supplied 91 % by fossil fuels. Howe ver, 50 % of demand for heating and cooling is low- 
temperature (< 200 °C) for which there are cost-eff ective renewable energy options, including through 
electr ification and direct use of renewable energy . In addition, industr y uses non-renewable sources as raw mate rials 
to produce products such as steel or chemicals. Industr ial inve stment decisions toda y will deter mine the future 
industr ial processes and energy options that can be considered by industr y, so it is imp ortant that those investments 
decisions are future-proof and avoid the creation of stranded assets. Theref ore, benc hmark s should be put in place to 
provid e industr y with incentives to switc h to production processes based on renewable energy , whic h are not only 
fuelled by renewable energy , but also use renewable-based raw mate rials such as renewable hydrogen. Member 
State s should promote the electr ification of industr ial processes where possible, for instance for low temperature 
industr ial heat. Moreover , Member States should promote the use of a common methodology for products that are 
labelled as having been produced partially or fully using renewable energy or using renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin as feedstoc k, taking into account existing Union product labelling methodologies and sustainable 
product initiatives. That would avoid decep tive practices and increase consumer trust. Further more, given 
consumer preferen ce for products that contr ibute to environmental and climate chang e objectives, it would 
stimulate market demand for those products.
(60) To reduce the Union’s dependence on fossil fuels and fossil fuel imp orts, a Union strateg y for imported and domestic 
hydrogen should be developed by the Commission on the basis of data repor ted by Member States.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  16/77(61) Renewable fuels of non-biological origin can be used for energy purposes, but also for non-energy purposes as 
feedstoc k or raw mater ial in industr ies such as the steel industr y or the chemical industr y. The use of renewable 
fuels of non-biological origin for both purposes exploits their full poten tial to replace fossil fuels used as feedstoc k 
and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in industr ial processes whic h are difficult to electr ify and should theref ore 
be included in a target for the use of renewable fuels of non-biological origin. National measures to suppor t the 
uptak e of renewable fuels of non-biological origin in those industr ial sectors that are difficult to electr ify should not 
result in net pollution increases due to an increased demand for electr icity generation that is satisfied by the most 
polluting fossil fuels, such as coal, diesel, lignite, oil peat and oil shale. The consum ption of hydrogen in industr ial 
processes whereby the hydrogen is produced as or derived from a by-product whic h is difficult to replace with 
renewable fuels of non-biological origin should be excl uded from that target. Hydroge n consumed to produce 
transpor t fuel is covered under the transpor t targets for renewable fuels of non-biological origin.
(62) The Union’s hydrog en strateg y, set out in the Commission communication of 8 July 2020 , entitled ‘A hydrog en 
strateg y for a climate -neutral Europe’, recognises the role of existing hydrogen production plants retrofi tted to 
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions in achieving the increased 2030 climate ambition. In light of that strateg y, 
and within the framew ork of the call for projects organised under the Union’s Innovation Fund established by 
Article 10a(8) of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (26), early mov ers have taken 
inve stment decisions with a view to retrofi tting pre-existing hydrog en production facilities based on steam methane 
reforming technology with the aim of decarbonising hydrog en production. For the purpose of calculating the 
denominator in the contr ibution of renewable fuels of non-biological origin used for final energy and non-energy 
purposes in industr y, hydrog en produced in retrofi tted production facilities based on steam methane reforming 
technology for which a Commission decision with a view to the award of a grant under the Inno vation Fund has 
been published before the date of entr y into force of this Directive and that achieve an averag e greenhouse gas 
reduction of 70 % on an annual basis, should not be taken into account.
(63) Moreover , it should be ackn owledg ed that the replacement of hydrogen produced from the steam methane 
reforming process might pose specif ic challenges for certain existing integra ted ammonia production facilities. It 
would necessitate the rebuilding of such production facilities, which would require a substantial effort by Member 
State s depending on their specifi c national circumstances and the structure of their energy supply .
(64) In order to achieve the objective of the Union to become climate neutral by 2050 and to decarbonise Union’s 
industr y, Member States should be able to combine the use of non-f ossil energy sources and renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin in the context of their specific national circumstances and energy mix. In that context, Member 
State s should be able to reduce the targe t for the use of renewable fuels of non-biological origin in the industr y 
sector , provided that they consume a limited share of hydrog en or its derivatives produced from fossil fuels and that 
they are on track towards their expected national contr ibution in accordance with the formula of Annex II to 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
(65) Increasing ambition in the heating and cooling sector is key to deliver ing the overall renewable energy target given 
that heating and cooling constitute s around half of the Union’s energy consum ption, cover ing a wide range of end 
uses and technology in buildings, industr y and distr ict heating and cooling. To accelerat e the increase of renewable 
energy in the heating and cooling sector , a minimum annual percentage point increase at Member State level should 
be made binding on all Member States. The minimum annual average binding increase of 0,8 percentage points 
between 2021 and 2025, and of 1,1 percentage points between 2026 and 2030 in heating and cooling applicable 
to all Member States should be compl emented with additional indicative increases or top- up rates calculat ed 
specifi cally for each Member State in order to reach an average increase of 1,8 percentage points at Union level. 
Those Member State-specific additional indicative increases or top- ups aim to redistr ibut e the additional effort 
needed to achieve the desired level of renewable energy in 2030 among Member States on the basis of gross 
(26)Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 Octo ber 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas 
emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  17/77domestic product and cost-effe ctiveness and to guide Member States as regar ds what could be a sufficient level of 
renewable energy to deplo y in that sector . Member States should carry out, in accordance with the energy efficiency 
first principle, an assessment of their pote ntial energy from renewable sources in the heating and cooling sector and 
of the potential use of waste heat and cold. Member State s should implement two or more measures from the list of 
measures to facilitate increasing the share of renewable energy in heating and cooling. When adopt ing and 
imp lementing those measures, Member State s should ensure that those measures are accessible to all consumers, in 
particular those living in low-income or vulnerable households.
(66) To ensure that the increased importance of distr ict heating and cooling is accompan ied by bette r information for 
consumers, it is appropr iate to clarify and strengthen transparency as regar ds the share of renewable energy and the 
energy efficiency of distr ict heating and cooling systems.
(67) Moder n renewable-based efficient distr ict heating and cooling syste ms have demonstrated their poten tial to provid e 
cost-effe ctive solutions for integrat ing renewable energy , increased energy efficiency and energy system integration, 
while facilitating the overall decarbonisation of the heating and cooling sector. To ensure that that potential is 
harnessed, the annual increase of renewable energy or wast e heat and cold in distr ict heating and cooling should be 
raised from 1 to 2,2 percentag e points without changing the indicative nature of that increase, reflecting the uneven 
development of that type of network across the Union.
(68) To reflect the increased importance of distr ict heating and cooling and the need to steer the development of those 
netw orks towards the integration of more renewable energy , it is appropr iate to encourag e operat ors of distr ict 
heating or cooling system s to connect third party suppliers of renewable energy and waste heat and cold with 
distr ict heating or cooling netw orks systems abov e 25 MW .
(69) Heating and cooling systems, in particular distr ict heating and cooling systems , increasing ly contr ibute to the 
balancing of the electr icity grid by provid ing additional demand for variable renewable electr icity , such as wind and 
solar , when such renewable electr icity is abundant, cheap and would be other wise curtailed. Such balancing can be 
achi eved by means of the use of highly efficient electr ically driven heat and cold generat ors, such as heat pumps, 
especially when those heat and cold generat ors are coupled with large ther mal stora ge, in particular in distr ict 
heating and cooling or in individual heating, where the economies of scale and syste m level efficiencies of distr ict 
heating and cooling are not available. The benefits of heat pumps are twof old, first, to signif icantly increase energy 
efficiency , saving considerable energy and costs for consumers, and second, to integrat e renewable energy through 
allowin g a greater use of geother mal and ambient energy . In order to provide further incentives for the use of 
renewable electr icity for heating and cooling and heat storage, with the deplo yment of heat pumps in particular , it is 
appropr iate to allow Member States to count renewable electr icity driving those heat and cold generat ors, including 
heat pumps towards the binding and indicative renewable energy annual increase in the heating and cooling and 
distr ict heating and cooling.
(70) Despite being widely available, waste heat and cold is under used, leading to a wast e of resources, lower energy 
efficiency in national energy systems and higher than necessar y energy consum ption in the Union. Prov ided it is 
supplied from effic ient distr ict heating and cooling, it is appropr iate to allow waste heat and cold to count towards 
partial fulfilment of the targe ts for renewable energy in buildings, industr y, heating and cooling and towards 
compl ete fulfilment of the targe ts for distr ict heating and cooling. That would allow synergies between renewable 
energy and waste heat and cold in distr ict heating and cooling netw orks to be harnessed by increasing the economic 
rationale for investing in the moder nisation and development of those networks. Specifi cally including waste heat in 
the industr ial renewable energy benc hmark should be acceptable only as regards waste heat or cold delivered via a 
distr ict heating and cooling operat or from another industr ial site or another building, thus ensur ing that such 
operat ors have heat or cold supply as their main activity and that the waste heat counte d is clearly differentiat ed 
from intern al waste heat recovered within the same or related enterprise or buildings.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  18/77(71) To ensure distr ict heating and cooling participate fully in energy sector integration, it is necessar y to extend the 
cooperation with electr icity distr ibution system operators to electr icity transmission system operators and to widen 
the scope of cooperation to grid investment planning and mark ets in order to better utilise the potential of distr ict 
heating and cooling for providing flexibility services in electr icity mark ets. Further cooperation with gas netw ork 
operat ors, including hydrog en and other energy netw orks, should also be made possible to ensure a wider 
integration across energy carriers and their most cost-effe ctive use. Further more, requirements for closer 
coordination between distr ict heating and cooling operators, industr ial and tertiary sectors, and local author ities 
could facilita te the dialogue and cooperation necessar y to harness cost-effective waste heat and cold pote ntials via 
distr ict heating and cooling systems.
(72) The use of renewable fuels and renewable electr icity in the transpor t sector can contr ibute to the decarbonisation of 
the Union transpor t sector in a cost-eff ective manner , and improve, amongst other matte rs, energy diversifi cation in 
that sector while promoting innovation, economic growth and jobs in the Union and while reducing reliance on 
energy impor ts. With a view to achi eving the increased target for greenhouse gas emissions savings set by 
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119, the level of renewable energy supplied to all transpor t modes in the Union should be 
increased. Allowing the Member States to choose between a transpor t target expressed as a greenhouse gas intensity 
reduction target or as a share of the consum ption of renewable energy provides the Member States with an 
appropr iate degree of flexibility to design their policies to decarbonise transpor t. Further more, introducing a 
combined energy-based targe t for advanced biofuels and biogas and renewable fuels of non-biological origin, 
including a minimum share for renewable fuels of non-biological origin would ensure an increased use of the 
renewable fuels with smallest environmental imp act in transpor t modes that are difficult to electr ify such as 
mar itime transpor t and aviation. To kick start the fuel shift in mar itime transpor t, Member States with mar itime 
ports should endeav our to ensure that from 2030 the share of renewable fuels of non-biological origin in the total 
amount of energy supplied to the mar itime transpor t sector is at least 1,2 %. The achi evement of those targets 
should be ensured by oblig ations on fuel suppliers as well as by other measures laid down in Regulations 
(EU) 2023/1805 (27)and (EU) 2023/2405 (28)of the European Parliament and of the Council. Dedicat ed oblig ations 
on aviatio n fuel suppliers should be imposed only pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2023/2405.
(73) In order to encourage the uptak e of the supply of renewable fuels to the hard-to-decarbonise sector of internatio nal 
mar ine bunker ing, for the calculation of the transpor t targe ts, renewable fuels supplied to intern ational mar ine 
bunk ers should be included in the final consum ption of energy from renewable sources in the transpor t sector and, 
according ly, fuels supplied to international mar ine bunkers should be included in the final consump tion of energy 
sources in the transpor t sector . However , mar itime transpor t represents a large share of the gross final consump tion 
of energy for some Member States. In view of the current technological and regulatory constraints that prevent the 
commercial use of biofuels in the mar itime transpor t sector , it is appropr iate, by way of derog ation from the 
requirement to include all energy supplied to the mar itime transpor t sector, for the purpose of calculating specifi c 
transpor t target s, to allow Member States to cap the energy supplied to the mar itime transpor t sector at 13 % of the 
gross final consump tion of energy in a Member State. For insular Member States, where the gross final consum ption 
of energy in the mar itime transpor t sector is dispropor tionally high, namely more than a third of that of the road 
and rail sector s, the cap should be 5 %. However , for the calculation of the overall renewable energy target, 
consider ing the specifi c charact eristics of internatio nal mar ine bunk ers, rega rding fuels supplied to them, they 
should be included in the gross final consum ption of energy of a Member State only if they are renewable.
(27)Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on the use of renewable and low- 
carbon fuels in mar itime transpor t, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC (OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, p. 48).
(28)Regulation (EU) 2023/2405 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 October 2023 on ensur ing a level playing field for 
sustainable air transpor t (ReFuelEU Aviation) (OJ L, 2023/2405, 31.10.2023, ELI:  L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  19/77(74) Electromobility will play an essential role in decarbonising the transpor t sector . To foster the further development of 
electromobility , Member States should establish a credit mech anism enabling operat ors of recharging points 
accessible to the public to contr ibut e, by supplying renewable electr icity , towards the fulfilment of the oblig ation set 
up by Member State s on fuel suppliers. Member States should be able to include private recharging points in that 
credit mec hanism, if it can be demonstrated that the renewable electr icity supplied to those private rech arging 
points is provided solely to electr ic vehicles. While suppor ting electr icity in the transpor t sector through such credit 
mechani sms, it is imp ortant that Member States continue to set a high level of ambition for the decarbonisation of 
their liquid fuel mix, particularly in hard-to -decarbonise transpor t sectors , such as mar itime transpor t and aviatio n, 
where direct electr ification is much more difficult.
(75) Renewable fuels of non-biological origin, including renewable hydrogen, can be used as feedstoc k or as a source of 
energy in industr ial and chemical processes and in mar itime transpor t and aviation, decarbonising sectors in which 
direct electr ification is not technologically possible or competitive. They can also be used for energy stora ge to 
balance, where necessar y, the energy system, thereby playing a significant role in energy system integration.
(76) The Union’s renewable energy policy aims to contr ibute to achieving the Union’s climat e change mitig ation 
objectives in terms of the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. In the pursuit of that goal, it is essential to also 
contr ibut e to wider environmental objectives and in particular the prevention of biodiversity loss, on which the 
indirect land use change associated with the production of certain biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels has a 
negativ e impact. Contr ibuting to those climat e and environmental objectives constitute s a deep and longstanding 
inter generational concer n for Union citizens and the Union legislator s. The Union should thus promote those fuels 
in quantities whic h balance the necessar y ambition with the need to avoid contr ibuting to direct and indirect land- 
use chang e. The way the transpor t target is calculated should not affect the limits established on how certain fuels 
produced from food and feed crops on the one hand and high indirect land-use change -risk fuels on the other hand 
count towards that target. In addition, in order not to create an incentive to use biofuels and biogas produced from 
food and feed crops in transpor t and consider ing the impa ct of the war against Ukraine on food and feed supply , 
Member States should continue to be able to choose whether to count biofuels and biogas produced from food and 
feed crops towards the transpor t target. If they do not count them, Member States should be able to choose to reduce 
the energy-based targe t or to reduce the greenhouse gas intensity reduction target according ly, assuming that 
biofuels produced from food and feed crops save 50 % greenhouse gas emissions, whic h corresponds to the typical 
values set out in an annex to this Directive for the greenhouse gas emissions savings of the most relevant 
production pathwa ys of biofuels produced from food and feed crops as well as the minimum greenhouse gas 
emissions savings threshold that applies to most installations producing such biofuels.
(77) In order to ensure that the use of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels saves an increasing amount of greenhouse 
gas emissions and to address poten tial indirect effects of the promotion of such fuels, such as deforestation, the 
Commission should review the level of the maximum share of the average annual expansion of the global 
production area in high carbon stoc ks based on objective and scientific criteria, taking into consideration the 
Union’s climat e target s and commitments, and should, where necessar y, propose a new threshold on the basis of 
the results of its review . Further , the Commission should assess the possibility of designing an accelerat ed traject ory 
to phase out the contr ibution of such fuels to renewable energy target s in order to maximise the amount of 
greenhouse gas emissions savings.
(78) Setting the transpor t target as a greenhouse gas intensity reduction targe t makes it necessar y to provid e for a 
methodology that takes into consideration that diffe rent types of energy from renewable sources save diffe rent 
amounts of greenhouse gas emissions and, theref ore, contr ibut e diffe rently to a given target. Renewable electr icity 
should be considered to have zero greenhouse gas emissions, meaning it saves 100 % of greenhouse gas emissions 
compare d to electr icity produced from fossil fuels. That will creat e an incentive for the use of renewable electr icity 
since renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels are unlikely to achi eve such a high percentage of greenhouse gas 
emissions savings. Electr ification relying on renewable energy sources would theref ore become the most efficient OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  20/77way to decarbonise road transpor t. In addition, in order to promote the use of renewable fuels of non-biological 
origin in the aviation and mar itime transpor t modes, which are difficult to electr ify, it is appropr iate to introduce a 
multiplier for fuels supplied in those modes of transpor t when counting them towards the specifi c targets set for 
those fuels.
(79) The direct electr ification of end-use sectors, including the transpor t sector, contr ibut es to system efficiency and 
facilitates the transition to an energy system based on renewable energy . It is theref ore in itself an effective means to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The creation of a framew ork on additionality whic h applies specifically to 
renewable electr icity supplied to electr ic vehicles in the transpor t sector is theref ore not required. Further more, 
solar -electr ic vehicles can make a crucial contr ibution to the decarbonisation of the Union’s transpor t sector.
(80) Since renewable fuels of non-biological origin are to be counted as renewable energy regardl ess of the sector in 
which they are consumed, the rules to determine their renewable nature when produced from electr icity , which 
were applicable only to those fuels when consumed in the transpor t sector, should be extended to all renewable 
fuels of non-biological origin, rega rdless of the sector in whic h they are consumed.
(81) Renewable fuels of non-biological origin are important to increasing the share of renewable energy in sectors that 
are expect ed to rely on gaseous and liquid fuels in the long-ter m, including for industr ial applications and in heavy- 
duty transpor t. By 1 July 2028 , the Commission should assess the impact of the methodology defining when 
electr icity used for producing renewable fuels of non-biological origin can be considered to be fully renewable, 
including the impact of additionality and temporal and geographical correlation on production costs, greenhouse 
gas emissions savings, and the energy system and should submit a repor t to the European Parliament and the 
Council. The repor t should assess in a particular the impact of that methodology on the availabi lity and 
affordability of renewable fuels of non-biological origin for industr y and transpor t sectors and on the ability of the 
Union to achieve its targets for renewable fuels of non-biological origin, taking into account the Union strategy for 
imp orted and domestic hydrogen while minimising the increase in greenhouse gas emissions in the electr icity sector 
and the overall energy system. If that repor t concludes that the methodology falls shor t of ensur ing sufficient 
availability and affordability and does not substantially contr ibut e to greenhouse gas emissions savings, energy 
system integration and the achi evement of the Union targets for 2030 for renewable fuels of non-biological origin, 
the Commission should review the Union methodology and, where appropr iate, adop t a delegat ed act to amend the 
methodology to provide the necessar y adjustments to the criteria in order to facilitate the ramping-up of the 
hydrogen industr y.
(82) To ensure higher environmental effectiveness of the Union sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving 
criteria for solid biomass fuels in installations producing heating, electr icity and cooling, the minimum threshold 
for the applicability of such criteria should be lowered from the current 20 MW to 7,5 MW .
(83) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 strengthened the bioenergy sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions savings 
framewor k by setting criteria for all end-use sector s. It set out specifi c rules for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass 
fuels produced from forest biomass, requir ing the sustainability of harvesting operations and the accounting of 
land-use change emissions. In line with the objectives to preser ve biodiversity and prevent habitat destr uction 
pursuant to Directive 92/43/EEC, Directive 2000/60/EC, Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council (29)and Directive 2009/147/EC, it is necessar y to achi eve the enhanced protection of especially 
biodiverse and carbon-r ich habitats, such as primar y and old-gro wth forests, highly biodiverse forests, grasslands, 
peat lands and heathlands. Theref ore, excl usions and limitations to the sourcing of forest biomass from those areas 
should be introduced, in line with the approach for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from 
(29)Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 establishing a framewo rk for community 
action in the field of mar ine environmental policy (Mar ine Strategy Framewo rk Directive) (OJ L 164, 25.6.2008, p. 19).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  21/77agricultural biomass, exce pt where the risk-based approac h provid es for the necessar y excl usions and limitations and 
operat ors provide the necessar y assurances. In addition, subject to appropr iate transition periods for inve stment 
secur ity purposes, the greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria should also gradually apply to existing biomass- 
based installations to ensure that bioenergy production in all such installations leads to greenhouse gas emission 
reductions compared to energy produced from fossil fuels.
(84) The sustainability criteria concer ning forest biomass harvesting should be further specifi ed, in line with the 
principles of sustainable forest manag ement. Those specifications should aim to strengthen and clarify the risk- 
based approach for forest biomass, while provi ding Member State s with propor tionat e provisions allowing for 
target ed adap tations for practices that can be locally appropr iate.
(85) Member State s should ensure that their use of forest biomass for producing energy is compat ible with their 
oblig ations pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/841 of the European Parliament and of the Council (30). To that end, 
Member State s should conduct forward-looking assessments and imp lement necessar y measures that compl ement 
their oblig ations pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
(86) In view of the specific situation of the outermost regions referred to in Article 349 TFEU and character ised in the 
energy sector by isolation, limited supply and dependence on fossil fuels, provis ion should be made to exte nd the 
derogat ion that allows Member States to adopt specifi c criteria in order to ensure eligibility for financia l suppor t for 
the consum ption of certain biomass fuels in those regions to also cover bioliquids and biofuels. Any specifi c criteria 
should be objectively justified on the grounds of energy independence of the outermost region concer ned and of 
ensur ing a smooth transition to the sustainability criteria, the energy efficiency criteria and the greenhouse gas 
emissions saving criteria in the outermost region concer ned in accordance with Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
(87) The Union is committed to improving the environmental, economic and social sustainability of biomass fuel 
production. This Directive is compl ementar y to other Union legislative acts, in particular any legislative act on 
corporate sustainability due diligence which lays down due dilig ence requirements in the value chain with rega rd to 
adverse human rights or environmental impact.
(88) In order to reduce the administrative burden for producers of renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels and for 
Member State s, where voluntar y or national schemes have been recognised by the Commission through an 
imp lementing act as giving evidence or providing accurate data regarding compliance with sustainability and 
greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria as well as other requirements laid down in the amending provisions set out 
in this Directive, Member States should accept the results of the certification issued by such sche mes within the 
scope of the Commission’s recognition. In order to reduce the burden on small installations, Member States should 
be able to establish a simplified voluntar y verification mechanis m for installations with a total ther mal input of 
between 7,5 MW and 20 MW .
(89) To mitig ate the risks and better prevent fraud in the supply chains for bioenergy and recy cled carbon fuels, Directive 
(EU) 2018/2001 provid es for valuable additions in term s of transparency , traceability and super vision. In that 
conte xt, the Union database to be set up by the Commission aims at enabling the tracing of liquid and gaseous 
renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels. The scope of the database should be exte nded from transpor t to all other 
end-use sectors in whic h such fuels are consumed. Such an extensi on is intended to make a vital contr ibution to the 
compreh ensive monitoring of the production and consump tion of those fuels, mitig ating risks of double-counting 
or irregular ities along the supply chains covered by the Union database. In addition, to avoid any risk of double 
claims on the same renewable gas, a guarant ee of origin issued for any consignment of renewable gas register ed in 
the database should be cancelled. The database should be made publicly available in an open, transparent and user - 
friendly manner , while also respecting the principles of private and commercially sensitive data protection. The 
(30)Regulation (EU) 2018/841 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the inclusion of greenhouse gas 
emissions and removals from land use, land use chang e and forestr y in the 2030 climate and energy framework, and amending 
Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 and Decision No 529/2013/EU (OJ L 156, 19.6.2018, p. 1).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  22/77Commission should publish annual repor ts about the information repor ted in the Union database, including the 
quantities, geographic origin and feedstoc k type of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels. The Commission and 
Member States should endeav our to work on the interconnectivity between the Union database and existing 
national databases, enabling a smooth transition as well as enabling the bi-directionality of the databases. 
Com plementar y to that strengthening of the transparency and the traceability of individual consignments of raw 
mater ials and fuels in the supply chain, recently adopt ed Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 (31)
enhanced the requirements on auditing for certification bodies and increased the powers for public super vision of 
certification bodies, including the possibility for compet ent author ities to access documents and premises of 
economic operators in their super visor y controls. The integr ity of the verification framew ork of Directive 
(EU) 2018/2001 has according ly been signif icantly strengthened by complementing the auditing by certification 
bodies and Union database with verification and super visor y capacity of the compet ent author ities of the Member 
State s. It is strong ly recommended that Member States make use of both possibilities for public super vision.
(90) The Commission and the Member State s should continuously adap t to best administrative practices and take all 
appropr iate measures to simplify the implementation of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, and thus reduce compl iance 
costs for involved actors and affected sectors.
(91) Adequate anti-fraud provisions must be laid down, in particular in relation to the use of waste -based raw mater ials or 
of biomass that is identif ied as representing a high indirect land use chang e risk. As the detection and prevention of 
fraud is essential to prevent unfai r competition and rampant deforestation, including in third countr ies, full and 
certified traceability of those raw mat erials should be implemented.
(92) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 should theref ore be amended according ly.
(93) Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 make s several referen ces to the Union-level binding target of at least 32 % for the share 
of renewable energy consumed in the Union in 2030. As that target needs to be increased in order to contr ibute 
effectively to the ambition to decrease greenhouse gas emissions by 55 % by 2030, those referen ces should be 
amended. Any additional planning and repor ting requirements set will not creat e a new planning and repor ting 
system, but should be subject to the existing planning and repor ting framework under that Regulation.
(94) The scope of Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (32)should be amended in order to 
avoid a duplication of regulatory requirements with regard to transpor t fuel decarbonisation objectives and to align 
with Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
(95) The definitions laid down Directive 98/70/EC should be aligned with those laid down in Directive (EU) 2018/2001 
in order to avoid different definitions being applied pursuant to those two acts.
(96) The obligations regar ding the greenhouse gas emissions reduction and the use of biofuels in Directive 98/70/EC 
should be deleted in order to streamline and avoid double regulation with regar d to the strengthened transpor t fuel 
decarbonisation oblig ations whic h are provided for in Directive (EU) 2018/2001.
(97) The obligations regar ding the monitoring of and repor ting on the greenhouse gas emission reductions set out in 
Directive 98/70/EC should be deleted to avoid duplicating the regulation of repor ting obligations.
(31)Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 of 14 June 2022 on rules to verify sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions 
saving criteria and low indirect land-use chang e-risk criteria (OJ L 168, 27.6.2022, p. 1).
(32)Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 Octo ber 1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels 
and amending Council Directive 93/12/EEC (OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58).OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  23/77(98) Council Directive (EU) 2015/652 (33), whic h provides the detailed rules for the unif orm implementation of Article 7a 
of Directive 98/70/EC, should be repealed as it becomes obsolete with the repeal of Article 7a of Directive 98/70/EC 
by this Directive.
(99) As regards bio-based compo nents in diesel fuel, the referen ce in Directive 98/70/EC to diesel fuel B7, that is diesel 
fuel containing up to 7 % fatty acid meth yl esters (FAME), limits available options to attain higher biofuel 
incor poration targets as set out in Directive (EU) 2018/2001. That is due to the fact that almost the entire Union 
supply of diesel fuel is already B7. For that reason, the maximum share of bio-based compo nents should be 
increased from 7 % to 10 %. Sustaining the mark et uptak e of B10, that is diesel fuel containing up to 10 % FAME, 
requires a Union-wide B7 prot ection grade for 7 % FAME in diesel fuel due to the sizeable propor tion of vehicles 
not compati ble with B10 expect ed to be present in the fleet by 2030. That should be reflected in Article 4(1), 
second subparagraph, of Directive 98/70/EC.
(100) Transitional provisions should allow for an ordered continuation of data collection and the fulfilment of repor ting 
oblig ations with respect to the articles of Directive 98/70/EC delet ed by this Directive.
(101) Since the objectives of this Directive, namely reducing greenhouse gas emissions, energy dependence and energy 
prices, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather , by reasons of the scale of the action, be 
bette r achieve d at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiar ity as set 
out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of propor tionality , as set out in 
that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessar y in order to achieve those objectives.
(102) In accordance with the Joint Political Declaration of 28 Sept ember 2011 of Member State s and the Commission on 
explanato ry documents (34), Member States have under taken to accompan y, in justif ied cases, the notifi cation of 
their transposition measures with one or more documents explaining the relationship between the compo nents of a 
directive and the corresponding parts of national transposition instr uments. With regard to this Directive, the 
legislator s consider the transmission of such documents to be justif ied, in particular followi ng the judgment of the 
European Cour t of Justice in Case Commission vs Belgium (35)(case C-543/17).
(103) In order to offset the regulatory burdens introduced by this Directive on citizens, administrations and under takings, 
the Commission should review the regulator y framew ork in the sectors concer ned in line with the ‘one in, one out’ 
principle, as set out in the Commission communication of 29 Apr il 2021 , entitled ‘Better Regulation: Joining forces 
to make better laws’,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:
Article 1
Amendments to Directiv e (EU) 2018/2001
Directive (EU) 2018/2001 is amended as follo ws:
(1) in Article 2, the second paragraph is amended as follows :
(a) point (1) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(1) “energy from renewable sources” or “renewable energy” means energy from renewable non-f ossil sources, 
namely wind, solar (solar ther mal and solar photo voltaic) and geotherma l energy , osmotic energy , ambient 
energy , tide, wave and other ocean energy , hydropo wer, biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas, 
and biogas;
(33)Council Directive (EU) 2015/652 of 20 Apr il 2015 laying down calculation methods and repor ting requirements pursuant to 
Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels (OJ L 107, 
25.4.2015, p. 26).
(34)OJ C 369, 17.12.2011, p. 14.
(35)Judgment of the Cour t of Justice of 8 July 2019, Commission v Belgium, C-543/17, ECLI:EU:C:2019:573.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  24/77(1a) ‘industr ial grade roundwoo d’ means saw logs, veneer logs, round or split pulpw ood, as well as all other 
roundwoo d that is suitable for industr ial purposes, excl uding roundwoo d the charact eristics of which , such 
as species, dimensions, rectitude and node density , make it unsuitable for industr ial use as defined and duly 
justified by Member State s according to the relevant forest and mark et conditions;’;
(b) point (4) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(4) “gross final consum ption of energy” means the energy commodities delivered for energy purposes to 
industr y, transpor t, households, services including public services, agriculture, forestr y and fisher ies, the 
consump tion of electr icity and heat by the energy branch for electr icity and heat production, and losses of 
electr icity and heat in distr ibution and transmission;’;
(c) the followi ng points are inser ted:
‘(9a) “renewables acceleration area” means a specifi c location or area, whether on land, sea or inland wate rs, 
which a Member State designat ed as particularly suitable for the installation of renewable energy plants;
(9b) “solar energy equipment” means equipment that converts energy from the sun into ther mal or electr ical 
energy , in particular solar ther mal and solar photo voltaic equipment ;’;
(d) the followi ng points are inser ted:
‘(14a) “bidding zone” means a bidding zone as defined in Article 2, point (65), of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (*);
(14b) “innov ative renewable energy technology” means renewable energy generation technology that improves, 
in at least one way, compar able state -of-the-ar t renewable energy technology or that renders renewable 
energy technology that is not fully commercialised or that involves a clear degree of risk exploitable;
(14c) “smar t meter ing system” means a smar t meter ing system as defined in Article 2, point (23), of Directive 
(EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council (**);
(14d) “rech arging point” means a rech arging point as defined in Article 2, point (48), of Regulation 
(EU) 2023/1804 of the European Parliament and of the Council (***);
(14e) “mark et participant” means a mark et participant as defined in Article 2, point (25), of Regulation 
(EU) 2019/943;
(14f) “electr icity mark et” means electr icity mark ets as defined in Article 2, point (9), of Directive 
(EU) 2019/944;
(14g) “domestic batter y” means a stand-alone rech argeable batt ery of rated capacity greate r than 2 kwh, whic h is 
suitable for installation and use in a domestic environment ;
(14h) “electr ic vehicle batt ery” means an electr ic vehicle batte ry as defined in Article 3(1), point (14), of 
Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council (****);
(14i) “industr ial batter y” means an industr ial batte ry as defined in Article 3(1), point (13), of Regulation 
(EU) 2023/1542;
(14j) “state of health” means state of health as defined in Article 3(1), point (28), of Regulation (EU) 2023/1542;
(14k) “state of charg e” means state of charge as defined in Article 3(1), point (27), of Regulation 
(EU) 2023/1542;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  25/77(14l) “power set point” means the dynamic information held in a batte ry’s manage ment system prescr ibing the 
electr ic power settings at whic h the batter y should optimally operate during a recharging or a disc harging 
operation, so that its state of health and operational use are optimised;
(14m) “smar t recharging” means a recha rging operation in which the intensit y of electr icity delivered to the 
batte ry is adjusted dynamically , on the basis of information received through electronic communication;
(14n) “regulato ry author ity” means a regulatory author ity as defined in Article 2, point (2), of Regulation 
(EU) 2019/943;
(14o) “bi-directional rech arging” means bi-directional recharging as defined in Article 2, point (11), of 
Regulation (EU) 2023/1804;
(14p) “nor mal power rech arging point” means a normal power recharging point as defined in Article 2, point 
(37), of Regulation (EU) 2023/1804;
(14q) “renewable energy purchase agreement” means a contract under whic h a natural or legal person agrees to 
purch ase renewable energy directly from a producer , which encompasses, but is not limited to, renewables 
power purch ase agreements and renewables heating and cooling purch ase agreements;
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal 
mark et for electr icity (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 54).
(**) Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules 
for the intern al market for electr icity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU (OJ L 158, 14.6.2019, p. 125).
(***) Regulation (EU) 2023/1804 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 Septembe r 2023 on the 
deplo yment of altern ative fuels infrastr ucture, and repealing Directive 2014/94/EU (OJ L 234, 22.9.2023, 
p. 1).
(****) Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 concer ning 
batter ies and wast e batter ies, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and 
repealing Directive 2006/66/EC (OJ L 191, 28.7.2023, p. 1).’;
(e) the followi ng points are inser ted:
‘(18a) “industr y” means under takings and products that fall under sections B, C, and F and under section J, 
division (63) of the statistical classificat ion of economic activities (NA CE REV .2), as set out in Regulation 
(EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*);
(18b) “non-energy purpose” means the use of fuels as raw mater ials in an industr ial process, rather than to 
produce energy ;
_____________
(*) Regulation (EC) No 1893/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 
establishing the statistical classification of economic activities NACE Revision 2 and amending Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 3037/90 as well as certain EC Regulations on specific statistical domains (OJ L 393, 
30.12.2006, p. 1).’;
(f) the followi ng points are inser ted:
‘(22a) “renewable fuels” means biofuels, bioliquids, biomass fuels and renewable fuels of non-biological origin;
(22b) “energy efficiency first” means energy efficiency first as defined in Article 2, point (18), of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999;’;
(g) point (36) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(36) “renewable fuels of non-biological origin” means liquid and gaseous fuels the energy content of which is 
derived from renewable sources other than biomass;’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  26/77(h) the followi ng points are inser ted:
‘(44a) “plantation forest” means a plantation forest as defined in Article 2, point (11), of Regulation 
(EU) 2023/1115 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*);
(44b) “osmotic energy” means energy creat ed from the difference in salt concentration between two fluids, such 
as fresh wate r and salt water;
(44c) “system efficiency” means the selection of energy-efficient solutions where they also enable a cost-effective 
decarbonisation pathwa y, additional flexibility and the efficient use of resources;
(44d) “co-located energy storag e” means an energy storage facility combined with a facility producing renewable 
energy and connected to the same grid access point ;
(44e) “solar -electr ic vehicle” means a motor vehicle equipped with a powertrain containing only non-per ipheral 
electr ic machi nes as energy conver ter, with an electr ic rechargeable energy storag e syste m which can be 
recharg ed externally , and with vehicle-int egrated photo voltaic panels;
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2023/1115 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on the making 
available on the Union mark et and the expor t from the Union of certain commodities and products 
associated with deforestation and forest degradation and repealing Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 (OJ L 150, 
9.6.2023, p. 206).’;
(2) Article 3 is amended as follo ws:
(a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘1. Member States shall collectively ensure that the share of energy from renewable sources in the Union’s 
gross final consump tion of energy in 2030 is at least 42,5 %.
Member States shall collectively endeav our to increase the share of energy from renewable sources in the Union’s 
gross final consump tion of energy in 2030 to 45 %.
Member State s shall set an indicative target for innovati ve renewable energy technology of at least 5 % of newly 
installed renewable energy capacity by 2030.’ ;
(b) paragraph 3 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘3. Member States shall take measures to ensure that energy from biomass is produced in a way that minimises 
undue distor tive effects on the biomass raw mate rial mark et and an adverse impact on biodiversity , the 
envi ronment and the climat e. To that end, they shall take into account the wast e hierarc hy set out in Article 4 of 
Directive 2008/98/EC and shall ensure the application of the principle of the cascading use of biomass, with a 
focus on suppor t schem es and with due regar d to national specifi cities.
Member States shall design suppor t schemes for energy from biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels in such a way 
as to avoid incentivising unsustainable pathwa ys and distor ting competiti on with the mate rial sector s, with a view 
to ensur ing that woody biomass is used according to its highest economic and environmental added value in the 
followi ng order of priorities:
(a) wood-based products;
(b) extending the service life of wood-based products;
(c) re-use;
(d) recy cling;
(e) bioenergy ; and
(f) disposal.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  27/773a. Member States may derogat e from the principle of the cascading use of biomass referred to in paragraph 3 
where needed to ensure secur ity of energy supply . Member States may also derogat e from that principle where the 
local industr y is quantitatively or technically unable to use forest biomass for an economic and environmental 
added value that is higher than energy production, for feedstoc ks coming from:
(a) necessar y forest manage ment activities, aiming to ensure pre-commercial thinning operations or carried out 
in accordance with national law on wildf ire prevention in high-r isk areas;
(b) salvag e logging follo wing documented natural disturbances; or
(c) the harvest of certain woods whose charact eristics are not suitable for local processing facilities.
3b. Member States shall, no more than once a year, notify the Commission of a summar y of the derogations 
from the principle of the cascading use of biomass pursuant to paragraph 3a, together with the reasons for such 
derogations and the geographical scale to which they apply . The Commission shall make public the notificati ons 
received, and may issue a public opinion with regard to any of them.
3c. Member States shall not grant direct financial suppor t for:
(a) the use of saw logs, veneer logs, industr ial grade roundwoo d, stumps and roots to produce energy ;
(b) the production of renewable energy from the incineration of waste, unless the separate collection oblig ations 
laid down in Directive 2008/98/EC have been complied with.
3d. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, Member States shall not grant new suppor t or renew any suppor t for 
the production of electr icity from forest biomass in electr icity-only installations, unless such electr icity meets at 
least one of the follo wing conditions:
(a) it is produced in a region identif ied in a territorial just transition plan established in accordance with 
Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2021/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*) due to its 
reliance on solid fossil fuels, and it meets the relevant requirements set out in Article 29(11) of this Directive;
(b) it is produced applying biomass CO 2 captur e and storag e and it meets the requirements set out in 
Article 29(11), second subparagraph;
(c) it is produced in an outermost region as referred to in Article 349 TFEU, for a limited period and with the 
objective of phasing down , to the greate st extent possible, the use of forest biomass without affecting access 
to safe and secure energy .
By 2027, the Commission shall publish a repor t on the impa ct of the Member States’ suppor t sche mes for 
biomass, including on biodiversity , on the climat e and the environment, and on possible market distor tions, and 
shall assess the possibility for further limitations regar ding suppor t schem es for forest biomass.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2021/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 June 2021 establishing the 
Just Transition Fund (OJ L 231, 30.6.2021, p. 1).’;
(c) the followi ng paragraph is inser ted:
‘4a. Member State s shall establish a framework, whic h may include suppor t sche mes and measures facilitating 
the uptak e of renewables power purchase agreements, enabling the deplo yment of renewable electr icity to a level 
that is consist ent with the Member State’s national contr ibution refer red to in paragraph 2 of this Article and at a 
pace that is consistent with the indicative traject ories refer red to in Article 4, point (a)(2), of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999. In particular , that framewor k shall tackle remaining barriers to a high level of renewable 
electr icity supply , including those relat ed to permit-granting procedures, and to the development of the 
necessar y transmission, distr ibution and storag e infrastr ucture, including co-locat ed energy storage. When 
designing that framewor k, Member States shall take into account the additional renewable electr icity required to OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  28/77meet demand in the transpor t, industr y, building and heating and cooling sectors and for the production of 
renewable fuels of non-biological origin. Member States may include a summar y of the policies and measures 
under the framew ork and an assessment of their implementation, respectively , in their integra ted national energy 
and climat e plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and in their integrat ed 
national energy and climat e progress repor ts submitte d pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation.’ ;
(3) Article 7 is amended as follo ws:
(a) in paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘With regar d to the first subparagraph, point (a), (b), or (c), gas and electr icity from renewable sources shall be 
considered only once for the purposes of calculating the share of gross final consum ption of energy from renewable 
sources.
Energy produced from renewable fuels of non-biological origin shall be counte d in the sector - electr icity , heating 
and cooling, or transpor t - where it is consumed.
Without prejudice to the third subparagraph, Member State s may agree, via a specifi c cooperation agreement, to 
count all or part of the renewable fuels of non-biological origin consumed in one Member State towards the share 
of gross final consum ption of energy from renewable sources in the Member State where those fuels are produced. 
In order to monitor whether the same renewable fuels of non-biological origin are not counte d in both the Member 
State where they are produced and in the Member State where they are consumed and in order to record the amount 
counte d, Member State s shall notify the Commission of any such cooperation agreement. Such a cooperation 
agreement shall include the amount of renewable fuels of non-biological origin to be counted in total and for each 
Member State and the date on which the cooperation agreement is to become operational.’;
(b) in paragraph 2, the first subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), gross final consum ption of electr icity from 
renewable sources shall be calculated as the quantity of electr icity produced in a Member State from renewable 
sources, including the production of electr icity from renewables self-consumers and renewable energy 
communities and electr icity from renewable fuels of non-biological origin and excl uding the production of 
electr icity in pumped storag e units from water that has previously been pumpe d uphill as well as the electr icity 
used to produce renewable fuels of non-biological origin.’ ;
(c) in paragraph 4, point (a) is replaced by the follo wing:
‘(a) Final consum ption of energy from renewable sources in the transpor t sector shall be calculated as the sum of 
all biofuels, biogas and renewable fuels of non-biological origin consumed in the transpor t sector. That shall 
include renewable fuels supplied to international mar ine bunk ers.’;
(4) Article 9 is amended as follo ws:
(a) the followi ng paragraph is inser ted:
‘1a. By 31 December 2025 , each Member State shall agree to establish a framewor k for cooperation on joint 
projects with one or more other Member States for the production of renewable energy , subject to the followi ng:
(a) by 31 December 2030 , Member State s shall endeav our to agree on establishing at least two joint projects;
(b) by 31 December 2033 , Member State s with an annual electr icity consum ption of more than 100 TWh shall 
endea vour to agree on establishing a third joint project.
The identif ication of joint offshore renewable energy projects shall be consistent with the needs identif ied in the 
high-level strateg ic integrat ed offshore netw ork development plans for each sea-basin refer red to in Article 14(2) 
of Regulation (EU) 2022/869 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*) and the Union-wide ten-y ear 
netw ork development plan referred to in Article 30(1), point (b), of Regulation (EU) 2019/943, but may go 
beyond those needs and may involve local and regional author ities and private under takings.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  29/77Member State s shall work towards a fair distr ibution of the costs and benefi ts of joint projects. To that end, 
Member States shall take into account all the relevant costs and benefi ts of the joint project in the relevant 
cooperation agreement.
Member States shall notify the Commission of cooperation agreements, including the date on whic h the joint 
projects are expect ed to become operational. Projects financed by national contr ibutions under the Union 
renewable energy financing mech anism established by Commission Implementing Regulation 
(EU) 2020/1294 (**) shall be deemed to satisfy the obligations referred to in the first subparagraph for the 
Member States involved.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2022/869 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2022 on guidelines for 
trans-European energy infrastr ucture, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2009, (EU) 2019/942 and 
(EU) 2019/943 and Directives 2009/73/EC and (EU) 2019/944, and repealing Regulation (EU) 
No 347/2013 (OJ L 152, 3.6.2022, p. 45).
(**) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2020/1294 of 15 Sept ember 2020 on the Union renewable 
energy financing mechanism (OJ L 303, 17.9.2020, p. 1).’;
(b) the followi ng paragraph is inser ted:
‘7a. On the basis of the indicative goals for offshore renewable energy generation to be deplo yed within each 
sea basin, identif ied in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2022/869, the Member State s concer ned 
shall publish information on the volumes of offshore renewable energy that they plan to achi eve through 
tenders, taking into account technical and economic feasibility for the grid infrastr ucture and the activities that 
already take place. Member States shall endea vour to allocat e space for offshore renewable energy projects in 
their mar itime spatial plans, taking into account the activities that already take place in the affect ed areas. In 
order to facilitate permit-granting for joint offshore renewable energy projects, Member States shall reduce the 
complexity and increase the efficiency and transparency of the permit-granting procedure, shall enhance 
cooperation among themselves and shall, where appropr iate, establish a sing le contact point. In order to 
enhance public acceptance, Member States may include renewable energy communities in joint offshore 
renewable energy projects.’ ;
(5) Article 15 is amended as follows :
(a) in paragraph 1, the first subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘1. Member State s shall ensure that any national rules concer ning the author isation, certificat ion and licensing 
procedures that are applied to plants and associated transmission and distr ibution netw orks for the production of 
electr icity , heating or cooling from renewable sources, to the process of transf ormation of biomass into biofuels, 
bioliquids, biomass fuels or other energy products, and to renewable fuels of non-biological origin are 
propor tionate and necessar y and contr ibute to the imp lementation of the energy efficiency first principle.’ ;
(b) paragraphs 2 and 3 are replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. Member States shall clearly define any technical specifi cations which are to be met by renewable energy 
equipment and systems in order to benefit from suppor t schemes and to be eligible under public procurement. 
Where harmonised standards or European standards exist, including technical referen ce systems established by 
the European standardisation organisations, such technical specifi cations shall be expressed in term s of those 
standards. Precedence shall be given to harmonised standards, the references of which have been published in the 
Official Journal of the European Union in suppor t of Union law, including Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (*) and Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council (**). In their absence, other harmonised standards and European standards shall be used, in that order . 
Such technical specifi cations shall not prescr ibe where the equipment and system s are to be certified and shall 
not impede the proper functioning of the internal mark et.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  30/772a. Member States shall promot e the testing of inno vative renewable energy technology for producing, 
shar ing and storing of renewable energy through pilot projects in a real-w orld environment, for a limite d period, 
in accordance with the applicable Union law and accompanied by appropr iate safegua rds to ensure the secure 
operation of the energy system and avoid dispropor tionat e impact on the functioning of the intern al mark et, 
under the super vision of a compet ent author ity.
3. Member State s shall ensure that their compet ent author ities at national, regional and local level include 
provisions for the integration and deplo yment of renewable energy , including for renewables self-consump tion 
and renewable energy communities, and for the use of unav oidable wast e heat and cold when planning, 
including early spatial planning, designing, building and renovating urban infrastr ucture, industr ial, commercial 
or residential areas and energy and transpor t infrastr ucture, including electr icity , distr ict heating and cooling, 
natural gas and altern ative fuel netw orks. Member State s shall, in particular , encourag e local and regional 
administrative bodies to include heating and cooling from renewable sources in the planning of city 
infrastr ucture where appropr iate, and to consult the netw ork operators to reflect the impact of energy efficiency 
and demand-response programmes as well as specifi c provisions on renewables self- consump tion and 
renewable energy communities, on the infrastr ucture development plans of the network operators.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 setting a 
framewor k for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU (OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1).
(**) Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a 
framewor k for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, 
p. 10).’;
(c) paragraphs 4 to 7 are delet ed;
(d) paragraph 8 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘8. Member State s shall assess the regulatory and administrative barriers to long-t erm renewable energy 
purchase agreements, and shall remo ve unjustified barriers to, and promot e the uptak e of, such agreements, 
including by explor ing how to reduce the financial risks associated with them, in particular by using credit 
guarantees. Member State s shall ensure that those agreements are not subject to dispropor tionate or 
discr iminator y procedures or charges , and that any associate d guarant ees of origin can be transfe rred to the 
buye r of the renewable energy under the renewable energy purchas e agreement.
Member States shall descr ibe their policies and measures promoting the upta ke of renewable energy purch ase 
agreements in their integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and their integrated national energy and climat e progress repor ts submitte d 
pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation. They shall also provid e, in those progress repor ts, an indication of 
renewable energy generation that is suppor ted by renewable energy purchase agreements.
Following the assessment referred to in the first subparagraph, the Commission shall analyse the barriers to long- 
term renewable energy purch ase agreements and in particular to the deplo yment of cross-border renewable 
energy purchase agreements and shall issue guidance on the remo val those barriers.
9. By 21 November 2025 , the Commission shall consider if additional measures are needed to suppor t 
Member States in the imp lementation of the permit-granting procedures provided for in this Directive, including 
by means of developing indicative key performa nce indicators. ’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  31/77(6) the follo wing articles are inser ted:
‘Article 15a
Mains treaming renewable energy in buildings
1. In order to promote the production and use of renewable energy in the building sector, Member States shall 
determine an indicative national share of renewable energy produced on-site or nearby as well as renewable energy 
take n from the grid in final energy consum ption in their building sector in 2030 that is consistent with an indicative 
target of at least a 49 % share of energy from renewable sources in the building sector in the Union’s final energy 
consum ption in buildings in 2030. Member States shall include their indicative national share in the integrated 
national energy and climate plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 as well as 
information on how they plan to achieve it.
2. Member States may count waste heat and cold towards the indicative national share refer red to in paragraph 1, 
up to a limit of 20 % of that share. If they decide to do so, the indicative national share shall increase by half of the 
percentage of waste heat and cold counted towards that share.
3. Member States shall introduce appropr iate measures in their national regulations and building codes and, where 
applicable, in their suppor t sche mes, to increase the share of electr icity and heating and cooling from renewable 
sources produced on-site or nearby as well as renewable energy taken from the grid in the building stoc k. Such 
measures may include national measures relating to substantial increases in renewables self-consum ption, renewable 
energy communities, local energy storage, smar t recharging and bi-directional recharging, other flexibility services 
such as demand response, and in combination with energy efficiency imp rovements relating to cogeneration and 
major renovation s which increase the number of nearly zero energy buildings and buildings that go beyond 
minimum energy performa nce requirements provid ed for in Article 4 of Directive 2010/31/EU.
In order to achieve the indicative share of renewable energy provided for in paragraph 1, Member States shall, in their 
national regulations and building codes and, where applicable, in their suppor t sche mes or by other means with 
equivalent effect, require the use of minimum levels of energy from renewable sources produced on-site or nearby as 
well as renewable energy taken from the grid, in new buildings and in existing buildings that are undergoing major 
renov ation or a renewal of the heating system, in accordance with Directive 2010/31/EU, where that is economically , 
technically and functionally feasible. Member States shall allow those minimum levels to be fulfilled through, inter 
alia, efficient distr ict heating and cooling.
For existing buildings, the first subparagraph shall apply to the armed forces only to the extent that its application 
does not cause any conf lict with the nature and primar y aim of the activities of the armed forces and with the 
excep tion of mater ial used excl usively for militar y purposes.
4. Member States shall ensure that public buildings at national, regional and local level fulfil an exem plar y role as 
regar ds the share of renewable energy used, in accordance with Article 9 of Directive 2010/31/EU and Article 5 of 
Directive 2012/27/EU. Member States may allow that obligation to be fulfilled by, inter alia, provid ing for the roofs 
of public or mixed private-public buildings to be used by third parties for installations that produce energy from 
renewable sources.
5. Where deemed to be relevant, Member States may promote cooperation between local author ities and 
renewable energy communities in the building sector , particularly through the use of public procurement.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  32/776. In order to achi eve the indicative share of renewable energy provid ed for in paragraph 1, Member States shall 
promote the use of renewable heating and cooling systems and equipment and may promot e innovati ve technology , 
such as smar t and renewable-based electr ified heating and cooling systems and equipment, compl emente d, where 
applicable, with smar t management of energy consum ption in buildings. To that end, Member States shall use all 
appropr iate measures, tools and incentives, including, energy labels developed under Regulation (EU) 2017/1369, 
energy performa nce certificates established pursuant to Article 11 of Directive 2010/31/EU, and other appropr iate 
certificates or standards developed at Union or national level, and shall ensure the provis ion of adequat e information 
and advice on renewable, highly energy efficient alternati ves as well as on financial instr uments and incentives 
available to promote an increased replacement rate of old heating systems and an increased switc h to solutions based 
on renewable energy .
Article 15b
Mapping of areas necessar y for national contr ibutions towards the overall Union renewable energy target 
for 2030
1. By 21 May 2025 , Member States shall carry out a coordinat ed mapping for the deplo yment of renewable energy 
in their territory to identify the domestic poten tial and the available land surface, sub-surface, sea or inland water 
areas that are necessar y for the installation of renewable energy plants and their related infrastr ucture, such as grid 
and storag e facilities, including ther mal storag e, that are required in order to meet at least their national 
contr ibutions towards the overall Union renewable energy target for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of this Directive. To that 
end, Member States may use or build upon their existing spatial planning documents or plans, including mar itime 
spatial plans set up pursuant to Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (1)*. Member 
States shall ensure coordination among all the relevant national, regional and local author ities and entities, including 
netw ork operat ors, in the mapping of the necessar y areas, where appropr iate.
Member States shall ensure that such areas, including the existing renewable energy plants and cooperation 
mecha nisms, are commensurate with the estimated traject ories and total planned installed capacity by renewable 
energy technology set out in their national energy and climat e plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
2. For the purpose of identifying the areas refer red to in paragraph 1, Member States shall take into account in 
particular:
(a) the availability of energy from renewable sources and the potential for renewable energy production of the 
differ ent types of technology in the land surface, sub-surface, sea or inland water areas;
(b) the projected demand for energy , taking into account the poten tial flexibility of the active demand response, 
expected effic iency gains and energy system integrat ion;
(c) the availability of relevant energy infrastr ucture, including grids, stora ge and other flexibility tools or the potential 
to creat e or upgrade such grid infrastr ucture and storag e.
3. Member States shall favour multiple uses of the areas refer red to in paragraph 1. Renewable energy projects 
shall be compat ible with pre-existing uses of those areas.
4. Member States shall periodically review and, where necessar y, update the areas referred to in paragraph 1 of this 
Article, in particular in the conte xt of the updat es of their national energy and climat e plans submitte d pursuant to 
Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
Article 15c
Renewables acceleration areas
1. By 21 Febr uary 2026 , Member States shall ensure that compet ent author ities adopt one or more plans 
designating, as a sub-set of the areas refer red to in Article 15b(1), renewables acceleration areas for one or more 
types of renewable energy sources. Member States may excl ude biomass combustion and hydropowe r plants. In 
those plans, compet ent author ities shall:OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  33/77(a) designate sufficiently homogeneous land, inland water , and sea areas where the deplo yment of a specifi c type or 
specifi c types of renewable energy sources is not expecte d to have a signif icant envi ronmental impa ct, in view of 
the particular ities of the selecte d area, while:
(i) giving priority to artificial and built surfaces, such as roof tops and facades of buildings, transpor t 
infrastr ucture and their direct surroundings, parking areas, farms, waste sites, industr ial sites, mines, 
artificial inland water bodies, lakes or reser voirs and, where appropr iate, urban waste wate r treatment sites, 
as well as degraded land not usable for agriculture;
(ii) excl uding Natura 2000 sites and areas designated under national prote ction schem es for nature and 
biodiversity conser vation, major bird and mar ine mammal migrat ory routes as well as other areas identif ied 
on the basis of sensitivity maps and the tools refer red to in the point (iii), exce pt for artificial and built 
surfaces locat ed in those areas such as roof tops, parking areas or transpor t infrastr ucture;
(iii) using all appropr iate and propor tionate tools and datasets to identify the areas where the renewable energy 
plants would not have a signif icant envi ronmental impact, including wildlif e sensitivity mapping, while 
taking into account the data available in the cont ext of the development of a coherent Natura 2000 
netw ork, both as regards habitat types and species under Council Directive 92/43/EEC (2)*, as well as birds 
and sites protect ed under Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (3)*;
(b) establish appropr iate rules for the renewables acceleration areas on effective mitigation measures to be adopt ed 
for the installation of renewable energy plants and co-locat ed energy storag e, as well as assets necessar y for the 
connection of such plants and storag e to the grid, in order to avoid the adverse environmental impa ct that may 
arise or, where that is not possible, to signif icantly reduce it, where appropr iate ensur ing that appropr iate 
mitig ation measures are applied in a propor tionate and timely manner to ensure compl iance with the oblig ations 
laid down in Article 6(2) and Article 12(1) of Directive 92/43/EEC, Article 5 of Directive 2009/147/EEC and 
Article 4(1), point (a)(i), of Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (4)* and to avoid 
deter ioration and achi eve good ecological status or good ecological potential in accordance with Article 4(1), 
point (a), of Directive 2000/60/EC.
The rules refer red to in point (b) of the first subparagraph shall be target ed to the specifi cities of each identif ied 
renewables acceleration area, to the type or types of renewable energy technology to be deplo yed in each area and to 
the identif ied environmental impact.
Com pliance with the rules refer red to in the first subparagraph, point (b), of this paragraph and the implementation of 
the appropr iate mitigation measures by the individual projects shall result in the presump tion that projects are not in 
breac h of those provisions without prejudice to Article 16a(4) and (5) of this Directive. Where novel mitig ation 
measures to prevent, to the extent possible, the killing or disturbance of species prot ected under 
Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC, or any other environmental impact, have not been widely tested as regar ds 
their effectiveness, Member States may allow their use for one or several pilot projects for a limited time period, 
provid ed that the effectiveness of such mitig ation measures is closely monit ored and appropr iate steps are taken 
immediately if they prove not to be effective.
Com petent author ities shall explain in the plans designating renewables acceleration areas refer red to in the first 
subparagraph the assessment made to identify each designate d renewables acceleration area on the basis of the 
criteria set out in point (a) of the first subparagraph and to identify appropr iate mitigation measures.
2. Before their adoptio n, the plans designating renewables acceleration areas shall be subject to an environmental 
assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (5)*, and, if they are 
likely to have a signif icant impact on Natura 2000 sites, to the appropr iate assessment pursuant to Article 6(3) of 
Directive 92/43/EEC.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  34/773. Member State s shall decide the size of renewables acceleration areas, in view of the specificities and 
requirements of the type or types of technology for which they set up renewables acceleration areas. While retaining 
the discretion to decide on the size of those areas, Member State s shall aim to ensure that the combined size of those 
areas is signif icant and that they contr ibute to the achievement of the objectives set out in this Directive. The plans 
designating renewables acceleration areas refer red to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, of this Article shall be made 
publicly available and shall be reviewed periodically , as appropr iate, in particular in the conte xt of the updating of the 
integrat ed national energy and climate plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
4. By 21 May 2024 , Member State s may declare as renewables acceleration areas specifi c areas which have already 
been designated to be areas suitable for an accelerat ed deplo yment of one or more types of renewable energy 
technology , provid ed that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) such areas are outside Natura 2000 sites, areas designated under national protect ion schemes for nature and 
biodiversity conser vation and identified bird migrat ory routes;
(b) the plans identifying such areas have been the subject of a strateg ic environmental assessment pursuant to 
Directive 2001/42/EC and, where appropr iate, of an assessment pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 92/43/EEC;
(c) the projects locat ed in such areas implement appropr iate and propor tionate rules and measures to address the 
adverse environmental impact that may arise.
5. The compe tent author ities shall apply the permit-granting procedure and deadlines refer red to in Article 16a to 
individual projects in renewables acceleration areas.
Article 15d
Public participation
1. Member States shall ensure public participation regar ding the plans designating renewables acceleration areas 
refer red to in Article 15c(1), first subparagraph, in accordance with Article 6 of Directive 2001/42/EC, including 
identifying the public affect ed or likely to be affected.
2. Member States shall promote public acceptance of renewable energy projects by means of direct and indirect 
participation of local communities in those projects.
Article 15e
Areas for grid and storage infras tructure necessar y to integ rate renewable energy into the electr icity system
1. Member State s may adopt one or more plans to designate dedicat ed infrastr ucture areas for the development of 
grid and storag e projects that are necessar y to integrat e renewable energy into the electr icity system where such 
development is not expect ed to have a signif icant environmental impact , such an impact can be duly mitig ated or, 
where not possible, compen sated for. The aim of such areas shall be to suppor t and compl ement the renewables 
acceleration areas. Those plans shall:
(a) for grid projects, avoid Natura 2000 sites and areas designate d under national prote ction sche mes for nature and 
biodiversity conser vation, unless there are no propor tionate altern atives for their deplo yment, taking into 
account the objectives of the site;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  35/77(b) for storag e projects, excl ude Natura 2000 sites and areas designated under national protection schemes;
(c) ensure synergies with the designation of renewables acceleration areas;
(d) be subject to an envi ronmental assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC and, where applicable, to an 
assessment pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 92/43/EEC; and
(e) establish appropr iate and propor tionat e rules, including on propor tionate mitigation measures to be adopt ed for 
the development of grid and storag e projects in order to avoid adverse effects on the environment that may arise, 
or, where it is not possible to avoid such effects, to signif icantly reduce them.
While prepar ing such plans, Member States shall consult the relevant infrastr ucture system operat ors.
2. By way of derog ation from Article 2(1) and Article 4(2) of and Annex I, point 20, and Annex II, point (3)(b), to 
Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (6)*, and by way of derogation from Article 6(3) 
of Directive 92/43/EEC, Member States may, under justif ied circumstances, including where needed to accelerate the 
deplo yment of renewable energy in order to achi eve the climate and renewable energy targets, exem pt grid and 
stora ge projects which are necessar y to integrate renewable energy into the electr icity system from the environmental 
impact assessment pursuant to Article 2(1) of Directive 2011/92/EU, from an assessment of their imp lications for 
Natura 2000 sites pursuant to Article 6(3) of Directive 92/43/EEC and from the assessment of their implications on 
species prote ction pursuant to Article 12(1) of Directive 92/43/EEC and to Article 5 of Directive 2009/147/EC, 
provid ed that the grid or storag e project is locat ed in a dedicat ed infrastr ucture area designate d in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Article and that it complies with the rules established, including on propor tionat e mitig ation 
measures to be adopt ed, in accordance with paragraph 1, point (e), of this Article. Member State s may also grant 
such exem ptions in relation to infrastr ucture areas designated before 20 November 2023 if they were subject to an 
environmental assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC. Such derogations shall not apply to projects that are 
likely to have significant effects on the environment in another Member State or where a Member State likely to be 
signif icantly affect ed so requests, as provided for in Article 7 of Directive 2011/92/EU.
3. Where a Member State exem pts grid and storage projects pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article from the 
assessments refer red to in that paragraph, the compet ent author ities of that Member State shall carry out a screening 
process of projects that are located in dedicat ed infrastr ucture areas. Such a screening process shall be based on 
existing data from the environmental assessment pursuant to Directive 2001/42/EC. The compe tent author ities may 
request the applicant to provide additional available information. The screening process shall be finalised within 30 
days. It shall aim to identify if any of such projects is highly likely to give rise to significant unforeseen adverse effects, 
in view of the environmental sensitivity of the geographical areas where they are locat ed, that were not identif ied 
during the environmental assessment of the plans designating dedicate d infrastr ucture areas carried out pursuant to 
Directive 2001/42/EC and, where relevant, to Directive 92/43/EEC.
4. Where the screening process identif ies a project to be highly likely to give rise to significant unforeseen adverse 
effects as refer red to in paragraph 3, the compe tent author ity shall ensure, on the basis of existing data, that 
appropr iate and propor tionat e mitigation measures are applied to address those effects. Where it is not possible to 
apply such mitig ation measures, the compet ent author ity shall ensure that the operat or adopts appropr iate 
compen satory measures to address those effects, whic h, if other propor tionat e compen satory measures are not 
available, may take the form of a monetar y compensation for species protect ion programmes, in order to ensure or 
improve the conser vation status of the species affect ed.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  36/775. Where the integration of renewable energy into the electr icity system requires a project to reinf orce the grid 
infrastr ucture in or outside dedicated infrastr ucture areas, and such a project is subject to a screening process carried 
out pursuant to paragraph 3 of this Article, to a determination whether the project requires an environmental impact 
assessment or to an environmental impact assessment pursuant to Article 4 of Directive 2011/92/EU, such a 
screening process, determination or environmental impact assessment shall be limited to the poten tial impact arising 
from the chang e or extensi on compar ed to the original grid infrastr ucture.
_____________
(1)* Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 establishing a framew ork 
for mar itime spatial planning (OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 135).
(2)* Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conser vation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora 
(OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7).
(3)* Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 Novem ber 2009 on the conser vation 
of wild birds (OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7).
(4)* Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a 
framew ork for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1).
(5)* Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the 
effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment (OJ L 197, 21.7.2001, p. 30).
(6)* Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of 
the effects of certain public and private projects on the envi ronment (OJ L 26, 28.1.2012, p. 1).’;
(7) Article 16 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 16
Organisation and main principles of the permit-g ranting procedure
1. The permit-granting procedure shall cover all relevant administrative permits to build, repowe r and operat e 
renewable energy plants, including those combining different renewable energy sources, heat pumps, and co-located 
energy storag e, including power and ther mal facilities, as well as assets necessar y for the connection of such plants, 
heat pumps and storag e to the grid, and to integrat e renewable energy into heating and cooling networks, including 
grid-connection permits and, where required, envi ronmental assessments. The permit-granting procedure shall 
compris e all administrative stages from the ackno wledgment of the complet eness of the permit application in 
accordance with paragraph 2 to the notificati on of the final decision on the outcome of the permit-granting 
procedure by the relevant compet ent author ity or author ities.
2. Within 30 days, for renewable energy plants located in renewables acceleration areas, and within 45 days, for 
renewable energy plants locat ed outside renewables acceleration areas, of receipt of an application for a permit, the 
compet ent author ity shall ackn owledge the complet eness of the application or, if the applicant has not sent all the 
information required to process the application, request that the applicant submit a complet e application without 
undue dela y. The date of ackno wledgeme nt of the compl eteness of the application by the compet ent author ity shall 
serve as the start of the permit-granting procedure.
3. Member States shall set up or designate one or more contact points. Those contact points shall, upon the 
request of the applicant, guide and facilitate the applicant during the entire administrative permit-application and 
permit-granting procedure. The applicant shall not be required to contact more than one contact point during the 
entire procedure. The contact point shall guide the applicant through the administrative permit-application 
procedure, including the steps relating to the prot ection of the environment, in a transparent manner up to the 
deliver y of one or more decisions by the compet ent author ities at the end of the permit-granting procedure, provide 
the applicant with all necessar y information and, where appropr iate, involve, other administrative author ities. The 
contact point shall ensure that the deadlines for the permit-granting procedures set out in this Directive are met. 
Applicants shall be allowed to submit relevant documents in digital form. By 21 November 2025 Member States 
shall ensure that all permit-granting procedures are carried out in electronic form.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  37/774. The contact point shall mak e available a manual of procedures for developers of renewable energy plants and 
shall provid e that information online, addressing distinctly also small-scale renewable energy projects, renewables 
self-consumers projects and renewable energy communities. The online information shall indicate the contact point 
relevant to the application in question. If a Member State has more than one contact point, the online information 
shall indicate the contact point relevant to the application in question.
5. Member States shall ensure that applicants and the general public have easy access to simple procedures for the 
settlement of disputes concer ning the permit-granting procedure and the issuance of permits to build and operate 
renewable energy plants, including, where applicable, alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
6. Member State s shall ensure that administrative and judicial appeals in the conte xt of a project for the 
development of a renewable energy plant, the connection of that plant to the grid, and the assets necessar y for the 
development of the energy infrastr ucture networks required to integrate energy from renewable sources into the 
energy system, including appeals related to environmental aspects, are subject to the most expeditious administrative 
and judicial procedure that is available at the relevant national, regional and local level.
7. Member States shall provide adequat e resources to ensure qualifi ed staff, upskilling and reskilling of their 
compet ent author ities in line with the planned installed renewable energy generation capacity provided for in their 
integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. 
Member States shall assist regional and local author ities in order to facilitate the permit-granting procedure.
8. Except when it coincides with other administrative stages of the permit-granting procedure, the duration of the 
permit-granting procedure shall not include:
(a) the time during which the renewable energy plants, their grid connections and, with a view to ensur ing grid 
stability , grid reliability and grid safety , the relat ed necessar y grid infrastr ucture, are being built or repowered;
(b) the time for the administrative stages necessar y for signif icant upgrades of the grid required to ensur ing grid 
stability , grid reliability and grid safety ;
(c) the time for any judicial appeals and remedies, other proceedings before a cour t or tribunal, and alternative 
dispute resolution mec hanisms, including complaint procedures and non-judicial appeals and remedies.
9. Decisions resulting from the permit-granting procedures shall be made publicly available in accordance with the 
applicable law.
Article 16a
Permit-g ranting procedure in renewables acceleration areas
1. Member States shall ensure that the permit-granting procedure refer red to in Article 16(1) shall not exceed 12 
months for renewable energy projects in renewables acceleration areas. However , in the case of offshore renewable 
energy projects, the permit-granting procedure shall not exceed two years. Where duly justif ied on the ground of 
extraordinar y circumstances, Member States may exte nd either of those periods by up to six months. Member States 
shall inform the project developer clearly of the extraordinar y circumstances that justify such an exte nsion.
2. The permit-granting procedure for the repo wering of renewable energy power plants, for new installations with 
an electr ical capacity of less than 150 kW, for co-located energy storag e, including power and ther mal facilities, as 
well as for their grid connection, where located in renewables acceleration areas, shall not exceed six months. 
Howe ver, in the case of offshore wind energy projects, the permit-granting procedure shall not exceed 12 months. OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  38/77Where duly justif ied on the ground of extraordinar y circumstances, such as on grounds of over riding safety reasons 
where the repower ing project has a substantial impact on the grid or on the original capacity , size or perf ormance of 
the installation, Member States may exte nd the six-month period by up to three months and the 12-month period for 
offshore wind energy projects by up to six months. Member States shall inform the project developer clearly about the 
extraordinar y circumstances that justify such an extension.
3. Without prejudice to paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Article, by way of derogation from Article 4(2) of and Annex II, 
points 3(a), (b), (d), (h), (i), and 6(c), alone or in conjunction with point 13(a), to Directive 2011/92/EU, with regard to 
renewable energy projects, new applications for renewable energy plants, including plants combining differ ent types 
of renewable energy technology and the repower ing of renewable energy power plants in designated renewables 
acceleration areas for the relevant technology and co-located energy storag e, as well as the connection of such plants 
and stora ge to the grid, shall be exem pt from the requirement to carry out a dedicate d envi ronmental impact 
assessment pursuant to Article 2(1) of Directive 2011/92/EU, provided that those projects compl y with 
Article 15c(1), point (b), of this Directive. That derog ation shall not apply to projects which are likely to have 
signif icant effects on the environment in another Member State or where a Member State that is likely to be 
signif icantly affect ed so requests, pursuant to Article 7 of Directive 2011/92/EU.
By way of deroga tion from Article 6(3) of Directive 92/43/EEC, the renewable energy plants referred to in the first 
subparagraph of this paragraph, shall not be subject to an assessment of their implications for Natura 2000 sites 
provid ed that those renewable energy projects compl y with the rules and measures established in accordance with 
Article 15c(1), point (b), of this Directive.
4. The compet ent author ities shall carry out a screening process of the applications referred to in paragraph 3 of 
this Article. Such a screening process shall aim to identify if any of the renewable energy projects is highly likely to 
give rise to significant unforeseen adverse effects in view of the environmental sensitivity of the geographical areas 
where they are locat ed, whic h were not identif ied during the environmental assessment of the plans designating 
renewables acceleration areas refer red to in Article 15c(1), first subparagraph, of this Directive carried out pursuant 
to Directive 2001/42/EC and, where relevant, to Directive 92/43/EEC. Such a screening process shall also aim to 
identify if any of such renewable energy projects falls within the scope of Article 7 of Directive 2011/92/EU due to 
its likelihood of signif icant effects on the environment in another Member State or due to the request of a Member 
State whic h is likely to be signif icantly affected.
For the purpose of such a screening process, the project developer shall provide information on the charact eristics of 
the renewable energy project, on its compl iance with the rules and measures identif ied pursuant to Article 15c(1), 
point (b), for the specifi c renewables acceleration area, on any additional measures adopt ed by the project developer , 
and on how those measures address environmental impact. The compet ent author ity may request the project 
developer to provid e additional available information. The screening process relating to applications for new 
renewable energy plants shall be finalised within 45 days from the date of submission of suffi cient information 
necessar y for that purpose. However , in the case of applications for installations with an electr ical capacity of less 
than 150 kW and new applications for the repower ing of renewable energy power plants, the screening process shall 
be finalised within 30 days.
5. Following the screening process, the applications referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article shall be author ised 
from an environmental perspective without requir ing any express decision from the compet ent author ity, unless the 
compet ent author ity adopts an administrative decision, setting out due reasons on the basis of clear evidence, to the 
effect that a specific project is highly likely to give rise to signif icant unforeseen adverse effects in view of the 
environmental sensitivity of the geographical area where the project is locat ed that cannot be mitig ated by the 
measures identified in the plans designating acceleration areas or proposed by the project developer . Such decisions 
shall be made publicly available. Such renewable energy projects shall be subject to an environmental impa ct 
assessment pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU and, if applicable, to an assessment pursuant to Directive 92/43/EEC, 
which shall be carried out within six months of the administrative decision identifying a high likelihood of 
signif icant unforeseen adverse effects. Where duly justif ied on the grounds of extraordinar y circumstances, that six- 
month period may be extended by up to six months.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  39/77In the event of justified circumstances, including where needed to accelerate the deplo yment of renewable energy to 
achi eve the climat e and renewable energy targets, Member States may exem pt wind and solar photo voltaic projects 
from such assessments.
Where Member States exem pt wind and solar photo voltaics projects from those assessments, the operat or shall adopt 
propor tionat e mitigation measures or, where such mitig ation measures are not available, compen satory measures, 
which , if other propor tionate compen satory measures are not available, may take the form of monetar y 
compen sation, in order to address any adverse effects. Where those adverse effects have an impact on species 
prote ction, the operator shall pay a monetar y compe nsation for species prote ction programmes for the duration of 
the operation of the renewable energy plant in order to ensure or improve the conser vation status of the species 
affected.
6. In the permit-granting procedure referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, Member State s shall ensure that the lack of 
reply by the relevant compet ent author ities within the established deadline results in the specific interm ediar y 
administrative steps to be considered as approved, excep t where the specific renewable energy project is subject to an 
environmental imp act assessment pursuant to paragraph 5 or where the principle of administrative tacit approval 
does not exist in the national legal system of the Member State concer ned. This paragraph shall not apply to final 
decisions on the outcome of the permit-granting procedure, which shall be explicit. All decisions shall be made 
publicly available.
Article 16b
Permit-g ranting procedure outside renewables acceleration areas
1. Member State s shall ensure that the permit-granting procedure refer red to in Article 16(1) shall not exceed two 
years for renewable energy projects locat ed outside renewables acceleration areas. However , in the case of offshore 
renewable energy projects, the permit-granting procedure shall not exceed three years. Where duly justified on the 
grounds of extraordinar y circumstances, including where they require exte nded periods needed for assessments 
under applicable Union environmental law, Member States may exte nd either of those periods by up to six months. 
Member States shall inform the project developer clearly of the extraordinar y circumstances that justify such an 
extensi on.
2. Where an environmental assessment is required pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU or 92/43/EEC, it shall be 
carried out in a sing le procedure that combines all relevant assessments for a given renewable energy project. When 
any such environmental impact assessment is required, the compet ent author ity, taking into account the information 
provid ed by the project developer , shall issue an opinion on the scope and level of detail of the information to be 
included by the project developer in the environmental impa ct assessment repor t, of whic h the scope shall not be 
extende d subsequently . Where a renewable energy project has adopt ed necessar y mitigation measures, any killing or 
disturbance of the species protect ed under Article 12(1) of Directive 92/43/EEC and Article 5 of 
Directive 2009/147/EC shall not be considered to be deliberate. Where novel mitig ation measures to prevent as 
much as possible the killing or disturbance of species protect ed under Directives 92/43/EEC and 2009/147/EC, or 
any other environmental impact, have not been widely tested as regar ds their effectiveness, Member States may allow 
their use for one or several pilot projects for a limite d time period, provi ded that the effectiveness of such mitigation 
measures is closely monitore d and appropr iate steps are taken immediately if they do not prove to be effective.
The permit-granting procedure for the repowe ring of renewable energy power plants, for new installations with an 
electr ical capacity of less than 150 kW and for co-located energy storag e, as well as for the connection of such plants, 
installations and storag e to the grid, located outside renewables acceleration areas shall not exceed 12 months, 
including with regard to envi ronmental assessments where required by the relevant law. However , in the case of 
offshore renewable energy projects, the permit-granting procedure shall not exceed two years. Where duly justif ied 
on the ground of extraordinar y circumstances, Member States may extend either of those periods by up to three 
months. Member States shall inform the project developer clearly of the extraordinar y circumstances that justify such 
an extensi on.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  40/77Article 16c
Acc elerating the permit-g ranting procedure for repo wering
1. Where repower ing of a renewable energy power plant does not result in an increase of the capacity of a 
renewable energy power plant beyond 15 %, and without prejudice to any assessment of pote ntial environmental 
impact required pursuant to paragraph 2, Member State s shall ensure that permit granting procedures for 
connections to the transmission or distr ibution grid shall not exceed three months following application to the 
relevant entity unless there are justif ied safet y concer ns or there is technical incompa tibility of the system 
compo nents.
2. Where the repo wering of a renewable energy power plant is subject to the screening process provid ed for in 
Article 16a(4), to a determination whether the project requires an environmental impact assessment or to an 
environmental impa ct assessment pursuant to Article 4 of Directive 2011/92/EU, such a screening process, 
determination or environmental impact assessment shall be limited to the pote ntial impact arising from a change or 
extensi on compared to the original project.
3. Where the repower ing of solar installations does not entail the use of additional space and compl ies with the 
applicable envi ronmental mitigation measures established for the original solar installation, the project shall be 
exem pt from any applicable requirements to carry out a screening process as provid ed for in Article 16a(4), to 
determine whether the project requires an environmental impact assessment, or to carry out an envi ronmental 
impact assessment pursuant to Article 4 of Directive 2011/92/EU.
Article 16d
Permit-g ranting procedure for the inst allation of solar energy equipment
1. Member State s shall ensure that the permit-granting procedure referred to in Article 16(1) for the installation of 
solar energy equipment and co-located energy storage, including building-int egrated solar installations, in existing or 
future artificial structures, with the exclusion of artificial water surfaces, shall not exceed three months, provided that 
the primar y aim of such artificial structures is not solar energy production or energy storage. By way of derogation 
from Article 4(2) of and Annex II, points 3(a) and (b), alone or in conjunction with point 13(a), to 
Directive 2011/92/EU, such installation of solar equipment shall be exem pt from the requirement, if applicable, to 
carry out a dedicat ed environmental impact assessment pursuant to Article 2(1) of that Directive.
Member States may excl ude certain areas or structures from the application of the first subparagraph for the purpose 
of prote cting cultural or histo rical heritage, national defence interests, or safety reasons.
2. Member State s shall ensure that the permit-granting procedure for the installation of solar energy equipment 
with a capacity of 100 kW or less, including for renewables self-consumers and renewable energy communities, shall 
not excee d one month. The lack of reply by the compe tent author ities or entities within the established deadline 
follo wing the submission of a compl ete application shall result in the permit being considered as granted, provid ed 
that the capacity of the solar energy equipment does not excee d the existing capacity of the connection to the 
distr ibution grid.
Where the application of the capacity threshold referred to in the first subparagraph leads to a signif icant 
administrative burden or to constraints to the operation of the electr icity grid, Member State s may apply a lower 
capacity threshold provided that it remains abov e 10,8 kW.
Article 16e
Permit-g ranting procedure for the inst allation of heat pumps
1. Member State s shall ensure that the permit-granting procedure for the installation of heat pumps below 50 MW 
shall not exceed one month. Howe ver, in the case of ground source heat pumps, the permit-granting procedure shall 
not exceed three months.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  41/772. Unless there are justified safet y concer ns, unless further works are needed for grid connections or unless there is 
technical incompati bility of the syste m compo nents, Member States shall ensure that connections to the transmission 
or distr ibution grid shall be permitted within two weeks of the notification to the relevant entity for:
(a) heat pumps of up to 12 kW electr ical capacity ; and
(b) heat pump s of up to 50 kW electr ical capacity installed by renewables self-consumers, provided that the electr ical 
capacity of a renewables self-consumer ’s renewable electr icity generation installation amounts to at least 60 % of 
the electr ical capacity of the heat pump.
3. Member State s may exclude certain areas or structures from the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 for the 
purpose of protecting cultural or histor ical heritage, national defence inter ests, or safety reasons.
4. All decisions resulting from the permit-granting procedure referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be made 
publicly available in accordance with the applicable law.
Article 16f
Overriding public interest
By 21 Febr uary 2024 , until climate neutrality is achieved, Member State s shall ensure that, in the permit-granting 
procedure, the planning, constr uction and operation of renewable energy plants, the connection of such plants to the 
grid, the related grid itself, and storag e assets are presumed as being in the overriding public interest and serving 
public health and safety when balancing legal inter ests in individual cases for the purposes of Article 6(4) and 
Article 16(1), point (c), of Directive 92/43/EEC, Article 4(7) of Directive 2000/60/EC and Article 9(1), point (a), of 
Directive 2009/147/EC. Member States may, in duly justif ied and specific circumstances, restr ict the application of 
this Article to certain parts of their territory , to certain types of technology or to projects with certain technical 
characteri stics in accordance with the priorities set out in their integrat ed national energy and climate plans 
submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. Member States shall inform the Commission 
of such restr ictions, together with the reasons theref or.’;
(8) in Article 18, paragraphs 3 and 4 are replaced by the following:
‘3. Member States shall ensure that their certification schemes or equivalent qualifi cation sche mes are available for 
installers and designers of all forms of renewable heating and cooling syste ms in buildings, industr y and agriculture, 
for installers of solar photo voltaic systems, including energy storag e, and for installers of recharging points enabling 
demand response. Those schemes may take into account existing schemes and structures as appropr iate and shall be 
based on the criteria laid down in Annex IV. Each Member State shall recognise the certificat ion awarded by other 
Member States in accordance with those criteria.
Member States shall set up a framew ork to ensure a suffi cient number of trained and qualifi ed installers of the 
technology refer red to in the first subparagraph to service the growth of renewable energy required to achieve the 
targets set out in this Directive.
To achieve such a sufficient number of installers and designers, Member States shall ensure that suffi cient training 
programmes leading to certificat ion or qualifi cation covering renewable heating and cooling technology , solar 
photo voltaic system s, including energy storage, rech arging points enabling demand response, and the latest 
innovati ve solutions thereof, are made available provided that they are compatible with their certificat ion schemes or 
equivalent qualification sche mes. Member States shall put in place measures to promote participation in such training 
programmes, in particular by small and medium-sized enterprises and the self-emplo yed. Member State s may put in 
place voluntar y agreements with the relevant technology providers and vendors to train suffi cient numbers of 
installers, whic h may be based on estimates of sales, in the latest innovati ve solutions and technology available on the 
mark et.
If Member States identify a substantial gap between available and necessar y number of trained and qualifi ed installers, 
they shall take measures to address that gap.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  42/774. Member States shall make information on certification schemes or equivalent qualification schem es referred to 
in paragraph 3 available to the public. Member States shall also make available to the public, in a transparent and 
easily accessible manner , a regularly updated list of installers who are certified or qualified in accordance with 
paragraph 3.’;
(9) Article 19 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(i) the first subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. To that end, Member States shall ensure that a guarantee of origin is issued in response to a request 
from a producer of energy from renewable sources, including gaseous renewable fuels of non-biological 
origin such as hydrog en, unless Member States decide, for the purposes of accounting for the market value 
of the guarant ee of origin, not to issue such a guarant ee of origin to a producer that receives financial 
suppor t from a suppor t scheme. Member States may arrange for guarant ees of origin to be issued for energy 
from non-renewable sources. Issuance of guarantees of origin may be made subject to a minimum capacity 
limit. A guarant ee of origin shall be of the standard size of 1 MWh. Where appropr iate, such standard size 
may be divided to a fraction size, provid ed that the fraction is a multiple of 1 Wh. No more than one 
guarant ee of origin shall be issued in respect of each unit of energy produced.’ ;
(ii) the followi ng subparagraph is inser ted after the second subparagraph:
‘Simpli fied registration processes and reduced registration fees shall be introduced for small installations of 
less than 50 kW and for renewable energy communities.’;
(iii) in the fourth subparagraph, point (c) is replaced by the following:
‘(c) where the guarant ees of origin are not issued directly to the producer but to a supplier or consumer who 
buys the energy either in a compet itive setting or in a long-t erm renewables power purch ase agreement.’;
(b) paragraphs 3 and 4 are replaced by the followi ng:
‘3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, guarant ees of origin shall be valid for transactions for 12 months after the 
production of the relevant energy unit. Member States shall ensure that all guarantees of origin that have not been 
cancelled expire at the latest 18 months after the production of the energy unit. Member States shall include 
expired guarant ees of origin in the calculation of their residual energy mix.
4. For the purposes of disclosure referred to in paragraphs 8 and 13, Member States shall ensure that energy 
under takings cancel guarantees of origin at the latest six months after the end of the validity of the guarant ee of 
origin. Further more, by 21 May 2025 , Member State s shall ensure that the data on their residual energy mix are 
published on an annual basis.’ ;
(c) in paragraph 7, point (a) is replaced by the follo wing:
‘(a) the energy source from whic h the energy was produced and the start and end dates of production, whic h may 
be specifi ed:
(i) in the case of renewable gas, including gaseo us renewable fuels of non-biological origin, and renewable 
heating and cooling, at an hourly or sub-hourly inter val;
(ii) for renewable electr icity , in accordance with the imbalance settlement period as defined in Article 2, 
point (15), of Regulation (EU) 2019/943.’;
(d) in paragraph 8, the followi ng subparagraphs are inser ted after the first subparagraph:
‘Where gas is supplied from a hydrogen or natural gas netw ork, including gaseous renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin and biomethane, the supplier is required to demonstrate to final consumers the share or 
quantity of energy from renewable sources in its energy mix for the purposes of Annex I to 
Directive 2009/73/EC. The supplier shall do so by using guarantees of origin excep t:OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  43/77(a) as regards the share of its energy mix corresponding to non-track ed commercial offers, if any, for which the 
supplier may use the residual energy mix;
(b) where a Member State decides not to issue guarantees of origin to a producer that receives financial suppor t 
from a suppor t sche me.
When a customer consumes gas from a hydrogen or natural gas netw ork, including gaseous renewable fuels of 
non-biological origin and biomethane, as demonstrated in the commercial offer by the supplier , Member States 
shall ensure that the guarantees of origin that are cancelled correspond to the relevant netw ork character istics.’;
(e) paragraph 13 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘13. By 31 December 2025 , the Commission shall adopt a repor t assessing options to establish a Union-wide 
green label with a view to promoting the use of renewable energy generat ed by new installations. Suppliers shall 
use the information contained in guarant ees of origin to demonstrate compl iance with the requirements of such 
a label.
13a. The Commission shall monitor the functioning of the guarant ees of origin system and assess by 30 June 
2025 the balance of supply and demand of guarant ees of origin in the market and, in the case of imbalances, shall 
identify relevant factors affectin g supply and demand.’ .
(10) in Article 20, paragraph 3 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘3. Subject to the assessment included in their integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitt ed pursuant to 
Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and in accordance with Annex I to that Regulation on the necessity 
to build new infrastr ucture for distr ict heating and cooling from renewable sources in order to achieve the overall 
Union target set in Article 3(1) of this Directive, Member State s shall, where relevant, take the necessar y steps with a 
view to developing efficient distr ict heating and cooling infrastr ucture to promote heating and cooling from 
renewable sources, such as solar ther mal energy , solar photo voltaic energy , renewable electr icity driven heat pumps 
using ambient energy and geotherma l energy , other geotherma l energy technology , biomass, biogas , bioliquids and 
waste heat and cold, where possible in combination with ther mal energy storag e, demand-response systems and 
power to heat installations.’ ;
(11) the follo wing Article is inser ted:
‘Article 20a
Facilitat ing system integ ration of renewable electr icity
1. Member State s shall require transmission system operators and, if the data are available to them, distr ibution 
system operators in their territory to mak e available data on the share of renewable electr icity and the greenhouse 
gas emissions cont ent of the electr icity supplied in each bidding zone, as accurat ely as possible in inter vals equal to 
the market settlement frequency but of no more than one hour , with forecasting where available. Member State s shall 
ensure that distr ibution system operat ors have access to the necessar y data. If distr ibution system operat ors do not 
have access, pursuant to national law, to all the data needed, they shall apply the existing data repor ting system under 
the European Netw ork of Transmission System Operators for Electr icity , in accordance with the provisions of 
Directive (EU) 2019/944. Member States shall provid e incentives for upgrades of smar t grids to better monitor grid 
balance and make available real time data.
If technically available, distr ibution system operat ors shall also make available anonym ised and aggregat ed data on the 
demand response poten tial and the renewable electr icity generated and injected to the grid by self-consumers and 
renewable energy communities.
2. The data referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made available digitally in a manner that ensures interoperability on 
the basis of harmonised data formats and standardised data sets so that it can be used in a non-discr iminato ry manner 
by electr icity mark et participants, aggregat ors, consumers and end-users, and that it can be read by electronic 
communication devices such as smar t mete ring systems, electr ic vehicle recharging points, heating and cooling 
systems and building energy manage ment system s.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  44/773. In addition to the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2023/1542, Member States shall ensure that 
manufa cturers of domestic and industr ial batte ries enable real-time access to basic batter y management system 
information, including batte ry capacity , state of health, state of charge and power set point, to batt ery owners and 
users, as well as to third parties acting, with explicit consent, on the owners’ and users’ behalf, such as building 
energy manag ement under takings and electr icity mark et participants, under non-discr iminato ry term s, at no cost 
and in accordance with the data prote ction rules.
Member States shall adopt measures to require that vehicle manuf acturers make available, in real-time, in-vehicle data 
relat ed to the batt ery state of health, batter y state of charg e, batt ery power set point, batter y capacity , and, where 
appropr iate, the location of electr ic vehicles, to electr ic vehicle owners and users, as well as to third parties acting on 
the owners’ and users’ behalf, such as electr icity mark et participants and electromobility service provid ers, under non- 
discr iminato ry term s and at no cost, in accordance with the data protection rules, and in addition to further 
requirements with regar d to type approval and market surveillance laid down in Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (*).
4. In addition to the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2023/1804, Member States or their designat ed 
compet ent author ities shall ensure that new and replaced non-publicly accessible normal power recharging points 
installed in their territory can suppor t smar t recharging functionalities and, where appropr iate, the interface with 
smar t mete ring system s, when deplo yed by Member States, and bi-directional recharging functionalities in 
accordance with the requirements of Article 15(3) and (4) of that Regulation.
5. In addition to the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2019/943 and Directive (EU) 2019/944, Member 
States shall ensure that the national regulator y framework allows small or mobile system s such as domestic batte ries 
and electr ic vehicles and other small, decentralised energy sources to participate in the electr icity mark ets, including 
cong estion manag ement and the provi sion of flexibility and balancing services, including through aggregation. To 
that end, Member State s shall, in close cooperation with all market participants and regulatory author ities, establish 
technical requirements for participation in the electr icity markets, on the basis of the technical charact eristics of 
those system s.
Member States shall provid e a level playing field and non-discr iminator y participation in the electr icity markets for 
small, decentralised energy assets or mobile syste ms.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and 
mark et surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units 
intende d for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing 
Directive 2007/46/EC (OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1).’;
(12) the follo wing articles are inser ted:
‘Article 22a
Mains treaming renewable energy in indust ry
1. Member States shall endea vour to increase the share of renewable sources in the amount of energy sources used 
for final energy and non-energy purposes in the industr y sector by an indicative increase of at least 1,6 percentage 
points as an annual average calculat ed for the periods 2021 to 2025 and 2026 to 2030.
Member States may count waste heat and cold towards the average annual increases referred to in the first 
subparagraph up to a limit of 0,4 percentage points, provided that the wast e heat and cold is supplied from efficient 
distr ict heating and cooling, excl uding netw orks which supply heat to only one building or where all ther mal energy 
is consumed only on-site and where the ther mal energy is not sold. If they decide to do so, the averag e annual 
increase refer red to in the first subparagraph shall increase by half of the waste heat and cold percentage points 
counte d.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  45/77Member States shall include the policies and measures planned and taken to achi eve such indicative increase in their 
integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 
and their integrat ed national energy and climate progress repor ts submitted pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation.
When electr ification is considered to be a cost-eff ective option, those policies and measures shall promot e the 
renewable-based electr ification of industr ial processes. Those policies and measures shall endeav our to creat e 
conducive mark et condition for the availability of economically viable and technically feasible renewable energy 
alternati ves to replace fossil fuels used for industr ial heating with the aim of reducing the use of fossil fuels used for 
heating in which the temperature is below 200 °C. When adop ting those policies and measures, Member State s shall 
take into account the energy efficiency first principle, effectiveness and internatio nal compet itiveness and the need to 
tackle regulatory , administrative and economic barriers.
Member States shall ensure that the contr ibution of renewable fuels of non-biological origin used for final energy and 
non-energy purposes shall be at least 42 % of the hydrog en used for final energy and non-energy purposes in industr y 
by 2030, and 60 % by 2035. For the calculation of that percentage, the followi ng rules shall apply:
(a) for the calculation of the denominator , the energy cont ent of hydrogen for final energy and non-energy purposes 
shall be take n into account, excl uding:
(i) hydrogen used as interm ediate products for the production of convention al transpor t fuels and biofuels;
(ii) hydrogen that is produced by decarbonising industr ial residual gas and that is used to replace the specifi c gas 
from whic h it is produced;
(iii) hydrogen produced as a by-product or derived from by-products in industr ial installations;
(b) for the calculation of the numerator , the energy content of the renewable fuels of non-biological origin consumed 
in the industr y sector for final energy and non-energy purposes shall be taken into account, excl uding renewable 
fuels of non-biological origin used as interm ediate products for the production of convention al transpor t fuels 
and biofuels;
(c) for the calculation of the numerator and the denominator , the values regar ding the energy cont ent of fuels set out 
in Annex III shall be used.
For the purposes of point (c) of the fifth subparagraph of this paragraph„ in order to determine the energy cont ent of 
fuels not included in Annex III, the Member States shall use the relevant European standards for the determination of 
the calor ific values of fuels, or where no European standard has been adopt ed for that purpose, the relevant ISO 
standards.
2. Member States shall promote voluntar y labelling schem es for industr ial products that are claimed to be 
produced with renewable energy and renewable fuels of non-biological origin. Such volun tary labelling schemes shall 
indicate the percentage of renewable energy used or renewable fuels of non-biological origin used in the raw mate rial 
acquisition and pre-processing, manuf actur ing and distr ibution stage, calculated on the basis of the methodologies 
laid down either in Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 (*) or in ISO 14067:2018.
3. Member States shall repor t the amount of renewable fuels of non-biological origin that they expect to impor t 
and expor t in their integrat ed national energy and climate plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and in their integrat ed national energy and climat e progress repor ts submitted pursuant 
to Article 17 of that Regulation. On the basis of that repor ting, the Commission shall develop a Union strateg y for 
imported and domestic hydrogen with the aim of promoting the European hydrogen mark et as well as domestic 
hydrogen production within the Union, suppor ting the implementation of this Directive and the achievement of the OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  46/77targets laid down herein, while having due regar d to secur ity of supply and the Union’s strateg ic auton omy in energy 
and level playing field on the global hydrog en mark et. Member States shall indicate in their integrat ed national energy 
and climate plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and in their integrat ed 
national energy and climat e progress repor ts submitte d pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation how they intend to 
contr ibut e to that strategy .
Article 22b
Conditions for reduction of the target for the use of renewable fuels of non-biological origin in the indust ry 
secto r
1. A Member State may reduce the contr ibution of renewable fuels of non-biological origin used for final energy 
and non-energy purposes referred to in Article 22a(1), fifth subparagraph, by 20 % in 2030, provided that:
(a) that Member State is on track towards its national contr ibution to the binding overall Union target set in 
Article 3(1), first subparagraph, which is at least equivalent to its expect ed national contr ibution in accordance 
with the formula refer red to in Annex II to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999; and
(b) the share of hydrog en, or its derivatives, produced from fossil fuels which is consumed in that Member State is 
not more than 23 % in 2030 and not more than 20 % in 2035.
Where any of those conditions are not fulfilled , the reduction refer red to in the first subparagraph shall cease to apply .
2. Where a Member State applies the reduction refer red to in paragraph 1, it shall notify the Commission thereof, 
together with its integrat ed national energy and climate plans submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999 and as part of its integrat ed national energy and climate progress repor ts submitted pursuant to 
Article 17 of that Regulation. The notifi cation shall include information about the updat ed share of renewable fuels 
of non-biological origin and all relevant data to demonstrate that conditions set out in paragraph 1, points (a) and 
(b), of this Article are fulfilled.
The Commission shall monit or the situation in Member State s benefitti ng from a reduction with a view to verifying 
the ongoing fulfilme nt of conditions set out in paragraph 1, points (a) and (b).
_____________
(*) Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 of 15 December 2021 on the use of the Environmental Footpr int 
methods to measure and communicate the life cycle environmental performa nce of products and organisations 
(OJ L 471, 30.12.2021, p. 1).’;
(13) Article 23 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘1. In order to promote the use of renewable energy in the heating and cooling sector, each Member State shall 
increase the share of renewable energy in that sector by at least 0,8 percentage points as an annual averag e 
calculated for the period 2021 to 2025 and by at least 1,1 percentage points as an annual averag e calculated for 
the period 2026 to 2030, starting from the share of renewable energy in the heating and cooling sector in 2020, 
expressed in term s of national share of gross final consump tion of energy and calculat ed in accordance with the 
methodology set out in Article 7.
Member States may count waste heat and cold towards the average annual increases refer red to in the first 
subparagraph, up to a limit of 0,4 percentage points. If they decide to do so, the average annual increase shall 
increase by half of the waste heat and cold percentage points counte d to an upper limit of 1,0 percentage points 
for the period 2021 to 2025 and of 1,3 percentage points for the period 2026 to 2030.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  47/77Member State s shall inform the Commission of their intenti on to count wast e heat and cold and the estimat ed 
amount in their integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. In addition to the minimum percentage points annual increases referred to in the 
first subparagraph of this paragraph, each Member State shall endeav our to increase the share of renewable 
energy in its heating and cooling sector by the additional indicative percentage points set out in Annex Ia to this 
Directive.
Member States may count renewable electr icity used for heating and cooling towards the annual averag e increase 
set out in the first subparagraph, up to a limit of 0,4 percentage points, provi ded that the efficiency of the heat 
and cold generator unit is higher than 100 %. If they decide to do so, the average annual increase shall increase 
by half of that renewable electr icity expressed in percentage points to an upper limit of 1,0 percentage points for 
the period 2021 to 2025 and of 1,3 percentage points for the period 2026 to 2030.
Member States shall inform the Commission of their intention to count renewable electr icity used in heating and 
cooling from heat and cold generat ors the effic iency of which is higher than 100 % towards the annual increase 
set out in first subparagraph of this paragraph. Member States shall include the estimat ed renewable electr icity 
capacities of heat and cold generat or units the efficiency of which is higher than 100 % in their integrat ed 
national energy and climat e plans submitt ed pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. 
Member States shall include the amount of renewable electr icity used in heating and cooling from heat and cold 
generat or units the efficiency of which is higher than 100 % in their integrat ed national energy and climate 
progress repor ts submitted pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation.
1a. For the calculation of the share of renewable electr icity used in heating and cooling for the purposes of 
paragraph 1, Member States shall use the average share of renewable electr icity supplied in their territory in the 
two previous years.
1b. Member State s shall carry out an assessment of their poten tial of energy from renewable sources and of 
the use of waste heat and cold in the heating and cooling sector including, where appropr iate, an analysis of 
areas suitable for their deplo yment at low ecological risk and of the poten tial for small-scale household projects. 
That assessment shall consider available and economically feasible technology for industr ial and domestic uses in 
order to set out mileston es and measures to increase the use of renewable energy in heating and cooling and, 
where appropr iate, the use of waste heat and cold through distr ict heating and cooling with a view to 
establishing a long-t erm national strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution originating from 
heating and cooling. That assessment shall be in accordance with the energy efficiency first principle and part of 
the integrat ed national energy and climate plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999, and shall accompan y the compre hensive heating and cooling assessment required by 
Article 14(1) of Directive 2012/27/EU.’ ;
(b) paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(i) the introduct ory phrase is replaced by the followi ng:
‘For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this Article, when calculating its share of renewable energy in the heating 
and cooling sector and its average annual increase in accordance with that paragraph, including the 
additional indicative increase set out in Annex Ia, each Member State:’;
(ii) point (a) is deleted;
(iii) the followi ng subparagraph is added:
‘Member States shall in particular provide information to the owners or tenants of buildings and SMEs on 
cost-effe ctive measures, and financial instr uments, to improve the use of renewable energy in the heating 
and cooling systems. Member State s shall provide the information through accessible and transparent 
advisor y tools.’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  48/77(c) paragraph 4 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘4. To achi eve the averag e annual increase refer red to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, Member States shall 
endeav our to implement at least two of the followi ng measures:
(a) physical incor poration of renewable energy or wast e heat and cold in the energy sources and fuels supplied 
for heating and cooling;
(b) the installation of highly efficient renewable heating and cooling syste ms in buildings, the connection of 
buildings to efficient distr ict heating and cooling syste ms or the use of renewable energy or waste heat and 
cold in industr ial heating and cooling processes;
(c) measures covered by tradable certificates proving compliance with the obligation laid down in paragraph 1, 
first subparagraph, through suppor t to installation measures under point (b) of this paragraph, carried out 
by another economic operator such as an independent renewable energy technology installer or an energy 
service compan y provid ing renewable energy installation services;
(d) capacity building for national, regional and local author ities to map local renewable heating and cooling 
potential and plan, imp lement and advise on renewable energy projects and infrastr uctures;
(e) the creation of risk mitig ation framewor ks to reduce the cost of capital for renewable heat and cooling and 
waste heat and cold projects, allowing for, inter alia, the bundling of smaller projects as well as linking such 
projects more holistically with other energy effic iency and building renov ation measures;
(f) the promotion of renewables heating and cooling purchase agreements for corporate and collective small 
consumers;
(g) planned replacement schem es of fossil heating sources, heating systems that are not compatible with 
renewable sources or fossil phase-out schem es with milestones;
(h) requirements at local and regional level concer ning renewable heat planning, encom passing cooling;
(i) the promotion of the production of biogas and its injection into the gas grid, instead of its use for electr icity 
production;
(j) measures promoting the integrat ion of ther mal energy storag e technology in heating and cooling systems ;
(k) the promotion of renewable based distr ict heating and cooling networks, in particular by renewable energy 
communities, including through regulatory measures, financing arrang ements and suppor t;
(l) other policy measures, with an equivalent effect, including fiscal measures, suppor t sche mes or other 
financial incentives that contr ibut e to the installation of renewable heating and cooling equipment and the 
development of energy netw orks supplying renewable energy for heating and cooling in buildings and 
industr y.
When adopting and imple menting those measures, Member States shall ensure their accessibility to all 
consumers, in particular those in low-income or vulnerable households, who would not other wise possess 
suffi cient up-front capital to benefit.’ ;
(14) Article 24 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘1. Member States shall ensure that information on the energy performa nce and the share of renewable energy 
in their distr ict heating and cooling systems is provided to final consumers in an easily accessible manner , such as 
on bills or on the suppliers’ websites and on request. The information on the share of renewable energy shall be 
expressed at least as a percentage of gross final consump tion of energy in heating and cooling assigned to the 
customer s of a given distr ict heating and cooling system, including information on how much energy was used 
to deliver one unit of heating to the customer or end-user .’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  49/77(b) paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 are replaced by the follo wing:
‘4. Member States shall endeav our to increase the share of energy from renewable sources and from waste heat 
and cold in distr ict heating and cooling by an indicative 2,2 percentage points as an annual average calculat ed for 
the period 2021 to 2030, starting from the share of energy from renewable sources and from waste heat and cold 
in distr ict heating and cooling in 2020, and shall lay down the measures necessar y to that end in their integra ted 
national energy and climat e plans submitt ed pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The 
share of energy from renewable sources shall be expressed in term s of share of gross final consump tion of energy 
in distr ict heating and cooling adjusted to normal average climatic conditions.
Member States may count renewable electr icity used for distr ict heating and cooling in the annual averag e 
increase set out in the first subparagraph.
Member States shall inform the Commission of their intenti on to count renewable electr icity used in distr ict 
heating and cooling towards the annual increase set out in first subparagraph of this paragraph. Member States 
shall include the estimat ed renewable electr icity capacities for distr ict heating and cooling in their integrat ed 
national energy and climat e plans submitt ed pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. 
Member State s shall include the amount of renewable electr icity used in distr ict heating and cooling in their 
integrat ed national energy and climate progress repor ts submitted pursuant to Article 17 of that Regulation.
4a. For the calculation of the share of renewable electr icity used in distr ict heating and cooling for the 
purposes of paragraph 4, Member States shall use the averag e share of renewable electr icity supplied in their 
territory in the two previous years.
Member States with a share of energy from renewable sources and from waste heat and cold in distr ict heating 
and cooling abov e 60 % may count any such share as fulfilling the average annual increase referred to in 
paragraph 4, first subparagraph. Member State s with a share of energy from renewable sources and from waste 
heat and cold in distr ict heating and cooling abov e 50 % and up to 60 % may count any such share as fulfilling 
half of the average annual increase referred to in paragraph 4, first subparagraph.
Member States shall lay down the necessar y measures to implement the averag e annual increase referred to in 
paragraph 4, first subparagraph, of this Article, in their integrated national energy and climate plans submitted 
pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
4b. Member State s shall ensure that operat ors of distr ict heating or cooling systems abov e 25 MWth capacity 
are encouraged to connect third party suppliers of energy from renewable sources and from waste heat and cold 
or are encourag ed to offer to connect and purc hase heat or cold from renewable sources and from waste heat 
and cold from third-par ty suppliers on the basis of non-discr iminato ry criteria set by the compet ent author ity of 
the Member State concer ned, where such operators need to do one or more of the followi ng:
(a) meet demand from new customers;
(b) replace existing heat or cold generation capacity ;
(c) expand existing heat or cold generation capacity .
5. Member States may allow an operator of a distr ict heating or cooling system to refuse to connect and to 
purchase heat or cold from a third-par ty supplier in any of the follo wing situations:
(a) the system lacks the necessar y capacity due to other supplies of heat or cold from renewable sources or of 
wast e heat and cold;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  50/77(b) the heat or cold from the third-par ty supplier does not meet the technical parameter s necessar y to connect 
and ensure the reliable and safe operation of the distr ict heating and cooling system;
(c) the operator can demonstrate that provid ing access would lead to an excessive heat or cold cost increase for 
final customer s compare d to the cost of using the main local heat or cold supply with which the renewable 
source or waste heat and cold would compet e;
(d) the operat or’s system is an efficient distr ict heating and cooling system.
Member States shall ensure that, when an operat or of a distr ict heating or cooling system refuses to connect a 
supplier of heating or cooling pursuant to the first subparagraph, information on the reasons for the refusal, as 
well as the conditions to be met and measures to be take n in the system in order to enable the connection, is 
provided by that operat or to the compet ent author ity. Member States shall ensure that an appropr iate process is 
in place to remedy unjustified refusals.
6. Member States shall put in place, where necessar y, a coordination framework between distr ict heating and 
cooling syste m operat ors and the poten tial sources of waste heat and cold in the industr ial and tertiary sector s to 
facilitat e the use of waste heat and cold. That coordination framew ork shall ensure dialogue as regards the use of 
waste heat and cold involving, in particular:
(a) distr ict heating and cooling system operators;
(b) industr ial and tertiary sector enterprises generating waste heat and cold that can be economically recover ed 
via distr ict heating and cooling systems, such as data centres, industr ial plants, large commercial buildings, 
energy storag e facilities, and public transpor t;
(c) local author ities responsible for planning and approvi ng energy infrastr uctures;
(d) scientific exper ts working on the latest state of the art of distr ict heating and cooling system s; and
(e) renewable energy communities involved in heating and cooling.’ ;
(c) paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 are replaced by the followi ng:
‘8. Member States shall establish a framewor k under whic h electr icity distr ibution system operat ors will assess, 
at least ever y four years, in cooperation with the operators of distr ict heating and cooling systems in their 
respective areas, the poten tial for distr ict heating and cooling system s to provide balancing and other system 
services, including demand response and ther mal stora ge of excess electr icity from renewable sources, and 
whether the use of the identif ied potential would be more resource- and cost-efficient than alternati ve solutions.
Member State s shall ensure that electr icity transmission and distr ibution system operat ors take due account of the 
results of the assessment required under the first subparagraph in grid planning, grid investment and 
infrastr ucture development in their respective territories.
Member State s shall facilitat e coordination between operators of distr ict heating and cooling systems and 
electr icity transmission and distr ibution system operators to ensure that balancing, storag e and other flexibility 
services, such as demand response, provid ed by distr ict heating and distr ict cooling system operators, can 
participate in their electr icity markets.
Member States may exte nd the assessment and coordination requirements under the first and third subparagraphs 
to gas transmission and distr ibution syste m operat ors, including hydrogen netw orks and other energy netw orks.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  51/779. Member States shall ensure that the rights of consumers and the rules for operating distr ict heating and 
cooling systems in accordance with this Article are clearly defined, publicly available and enforced by the 
compet ent author ity.
10. A Member State shall not be required to apply paragraphs 2 to 9 where at least one of the follo wing 
conditions is met:
(a) its share of distr ict heating and cooling was less than or equal to 2 % of the gross final consump tion of energy 
in heating and cooling on 24 December 2018 ;
(b) its share of distr ict heating and cooling is increased above 2 % of the gross final consump tion of energy in 
heating and cooling on 24 December 2018 by developing new efficient distr ict heating and cooling on the 
basis of its integrat ed national energy and climat e plan submitte d pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of, and in 
accordance with, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and the assessment referred to in Article 23(1b) of this 
Directive;
(c) 90 % of the gross final consum ption of energy in distr ict heating and cooling systems take s place in efficient 
distr ict heating and cooling systems .’;
(15) Article 25 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 25
Increase of renewable energy and reduction of greenhouse gas intensity in the transpor t secto r
1. Each Member State shall set an oblig ation on fuel suppliers to ensure that:
(a) the amount of renewable fuels and renewable electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector leads to a:
(i) share of renewable energy within the final consump tion of energy in the transpor t sector of at least 29 % by 
2030; or
(ii) greenhouse gas intensi ty reduction of at least 14,5 % by 2030, compar ed to the baseline set out in 
Article 27(1), point (b), in accordance with an indicative trajector y set by the Member State;
(b) the combined share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstoc k listed in Part A of Annex IX and 
of renewable fuels of non-biological origin in the energy supplied to the transpor t sector is at least 1 % in 2025 
and 5,5 % in 2030, of which a share of at least 1 percentage point is from renewable fuels of non-biological 
origin in 2030.
Member States are encouraged to set differ entiated targets for advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the 
feedstoc k listed in Part A of Annex IX and renewable fuels of non-biological origin at national level in order to fulfil 
the oblig ation set out in the first subparagraph, point (b), of this paragraph, in a way that the development of both 
fuels is promoted and expanded.
Member States with mar itime ports shall endeav our to ensure that as of 2030 the share of renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin in the tota l amount of energy supplied to the mar itime transpor t sector is at least 1,2 %.
Member State s shall, in their integrated national energy and climate progress repor ts submitted pursuant to Article 17 
of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, repor t on the share of renewable energy within the final consum ption of energy in the 
transpor t sector , including in the mar itime transpor t sector, as well as on their greenhouse gas intensit y reduction.
If the list of feedstoc k set out in Part A of Annex IX is amended in accordance with Article 28(6), Member State s may 
increase their minimum share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from that feedst ock in the energy supplied to 
the transpor t sector according ly.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  52/772. For the calculation of the targe ts referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), and the shares refer red 
to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (b), Member States:
(a) shall take into account renewable fuels of non-biological origin also when they are used as intermediate products 
for the production of:
(i) conventional transpor t fuels; or
(ii) biofuels, provided that the greenhouse gas emissions reduction achieve d by the use of renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin is not count ed in the calculation of the greenhouse gas emissions savings of the biofuels;
(b) may take into account biogas that is injected into the national gas transmission and distr ibution infrastr ucture.
3. For the calculation of the targets set in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (a), Member States may take into 
account recy cled carbon fuels.
When designing the obligation on fuel suppliers, Member States may:
(a) exem pt fuel suppliers supplying electr icity or renewable fuels of non-biological origin from the requirement to 
comply with the minimum share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the feedst ock listed in Part A of 
Annex IX with respect to those fuels;
(b) set the obligation by means of measures targeting volume s, energy conte nt or greenhouse gas emissions;
(c) distinguish between differ ent energy carriers;
(d) distinguish between the mar itime transpor t sector and other sectors .
4. Member States shall establish a mechani sm allowing fuel suppliers in their territory to exchange credits for 
supplying renewable energy to the transpor t sector. Economic operat ors that supply renewable electr icity to electr ic 
vehicles through public recharging points shall receive credits, irrespectively of whether the economic operat ors are 
subject to the oblig ation set by the Member State on fuel suppliers, and may sell those credits to fuel suppliers, whic h 
shall be allowed to use the credits to fulfil the oblig ation set out in paragraph 1, first subparagraph. Member States 
may include private recharging points in that mech anism provided it can be demonstrated that renewable electr icity 
supplied to those private recharging points is provi ded solely to electr ic vehicles.’ ;
(16) Article 26 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 1 is amended as follows:
(i) the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘1. For the calculation of a Member State’s gross final consum ption of energy from renewable sources 
referred to in Article 7 and of the minimum share of renewable energy and the greenhouse gas intensity 
reduction targe t refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), the share of biofuels and bioliquids, 
as well as of biomass fuels consumed in transpor t, where produced from food and feed crops, shall be no 
more than one percentage point higher than the share of such fuels in the final consum ption of energy in the 
transpor t sector in 2020 in that Member State, with a maximum of 7 % of final consum ption of energy in the 
transpor t sector in that Member State .’;
(ii) the fourth subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘Where the share of biofuels and bioliquids, as well as of biomass fuels consumed in transpor t, produced from food 
and feed crops in a Member State is limited to a share lower than 7 % or a Member State decides to limit the share 
further , that Member State may reduce the minimum share of renewable energy or the greenhouse gas intensi ty 
reduction target referred to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), according ly, in view of the contr ibution 
those fuels would have made in terms of the minimum share of renewable energy or greenhouse gas emissions 
savings. For the purpose of the greenhouse gas intensity reduction target, Member States shall consider those fuels 
save 50 % greenhouse gas emissions.’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  53/77(b) paragraph 2 is amended as follows:
(i) the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘2. For the calculation of a Member State’s gross final consum ption of energy from renewable sources 
referred to in Article 7 and the minimum share of renewable energy and the greenhouse gas intensit y 
reduction target refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), the share of high indirect land-use 
change -risk biofuels, bioliquids or biomass fuels produced from food and feed crops for which a signif icant 
expansion of the production area into land with high-carbon stoc k is obser ved shall not exceed the level of 
consum ption of such fuels in that Member State in 2019, unless they are certified to be low indirect land-use 
change -risk biofuels, bioliquids or biomass fuels pursuant to this paragraph.’ ;
(ii) the fifth subparagraph is replaced by the follo wing:
‘By 1 Septembe r 2023 , the Commission shall review the criteria laid down in the delegat ed act referred to in 
the fourth subparagraph of this paragraph on the basis of the best available scientific data and shall adopt 
delega ted acts in accordance with Article 35 in order to amend those criteria, where appropr iate, and to 
supplement this Directive by including a trajecto ry to gradually decrease the contr ibution to the overall 
Union target set in Article 3(1) and to the minimum share of renewable energy and the greenhouse gas 
intensity reduction target refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), of high indirect land-use 
change -risk biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from feedst ock for which a signif icant expansion 
of the production into land with high-carbon stoc k is obser ved. That review shall be based on a revised 
version of the repor t on feedstoc k expansion submitted in accordance with the third subparagraph of this 
paragraph. That repor t shall, in particular , assess whether the threshold on the maximum share of the 
average annual expansion of the global production area in high carbon stoc ks should be reduced on the basis 
of objective and scientifi c based criteria and taking into consideration the Union’s climate targe ts and 
commitments.
Where appropr iate, the Commission shall amend the criteria laid down in the delegat ed act referred to in the 
fourth subparagraph on the basis of the results of the assessment referred to in the fifth subparagraph. The 
Commission shall continue to review , ever y three years after the adoptio n of the delegat ed act referred to in 
the fourth subparagraph, the data under pinning that delegat ed act. The Commission shall update that 
delegat ed act when necessar y in light of evolving circumstances and the lates t available scientifi c evidence.’;
(17) Article 27 is replaced by the following:
‘Article 27
Calculation rules in the transpor t sector and with regard to renewable fuels of non-biological origin 
regardless of their end use
1. For the calculation of the greenhouse gas intensity reduction refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, 
point (a)(ii), the followi ng rules shall apply:
(a) the greenhouse gas emissions savings shall be calculated as follo ws:
(i) for biofuel and biogas, by multiplying the amount of those fuels supplied to all transpor t modes by their 
greenhouse gas emissions savings deter mined in accordance with Article 31;
(ii) for renewable fuels of non-biological origin and recy cled carbon fuels, by multiplying the amount of those 
fuels that is supplied to all transpor t modes by their greenhouse gas emissions savings deter mined in 
accordance with delegat ed acts adopt ed pursuant to Article 29a(3);
(iii) for renewable electr icity , by multiplying the amount of renewable electr icity that is supplied to all transpor t 
modes by the fossil fuel comparat or EC F(e) set out in in Annex V;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  54/77(b) the baseline referred to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a)(ii), shall be calculat ed until 31 December 
2030 by multiplying the amount of energy supplied to the transpor t sector by the fossil fuel compara tor EF(t) set 
out in Annex V; from 1 Januar y 2031 , the baseline refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a)(ii), 
shall be the sum of:
(i) the amount of fuels supplied to all transpor t modes multiplied by the fossil fuel comparat or EF(t) set out in 
Annex V;
(ii) the amount of electr icity supplied to all transpor t modes multiplied by the fossil fuel compar ator EC F(e) set 
out in Annex V;
(c) for the calculation of the relevant amounts of energy , the follo wing rules shall apply:
(i) in order to determine the amount of energy supplied to the transpor t sector , the values regar ding the energy 
content of transpor t fuels set out in Annex III shall be used;
(ii) in order to deter mine the energy content of transpor t fuels not included in Annex III, the Member States shall 
use the relevant European standards for the deter mination of the calor ific values of fuels, or, where no 
European standard has been adopt ed for that purpose, the relevant ISO standards;
(iii) the amount of renewable electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector is determined by multiplying the amount 
of electr icity supplied to that sector by the average share of renewable electr icity supplied in the territory of 
the Member State in the two previous years, unless electr icity is obtained from a direct connection to an 
installation generating renewable electr icity and supplied to the transpor t sector , in whic h case electr icity 
shall be fully counted as renewable and electr icity generat ed by a solar -electr ic vehicle and used for the 
consump tion of the vehicle itself may be fully counted as renewable;
(iv) the share of biofuels and biogas produced from the feedst ock listed in Part B of Annex IX in the energy 
content of fuels and electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector shall, excep t in Cypr us and Malta, be limited 
to 1,7 %;
(d) the greenhouse gas intensity reduction from the use of renewable energy is determined by dividing the 
greenhouse gas emissions savings from the use of biofuels, biogas, renewable fuels of non-biological origin and 
renewable electr icity supplied to all transpor t modes by the baseline; Member State s may take into account 
recy cled carbon fuels.
Member States may, where justified, increase the limit referred to in the first subparagraph, point (c)(iv), of this 
paragraph, taking into account the availability of feedst ock listed in Part B of Annex IX. Any such increase shall be 
notified to the Commission, together with the reasons theref or, and shall be subject to appro val by the Commission.
2. For the calculation of the minimum shares refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a)(i) and point 
(b), the following rules shall apply:
(a) for the calculation of the denominat or, that is the amount of energy consumed in the transpor t sector , all fuels 
and electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector shall be taken into account ;
(b) for the calculation of the numerator , that is the amount of energy from renewable sources consumed in the 
transpor t sector for the purposes of Article 25(1), first subparagraph, the energy cont ent of all types of energy 
from renewable sources supplied to all transpor t modes, including to international mar ine bunk ers, in the 
territory of each Member State shall be taken into account ; Member State s may take into account recy cled carbon 
fuels;
(c) the share of biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstoc k listed in Annex IX and renewable fuels of non- 
biological origin shall be considered to be twice its energy cont ent;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  55/77(d) the share of renewable electr icity shall be considered to be four times its energy cont ent when supplied to road 
vehicles and may be considered to be 1,5 times its energy content when supplied to rail transpor t;
(e) the share of advanced biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstoc k listed in Part A of Annex IX supplied in 
the aviation and mar itime transpor t modes shall be considered to be 1,2 times their energy cont ent and the share 
of renewable fuels of non-biological origin supplied in the aviation and mar itime transpor t modes shall be 
considered to be 1,5 times their energy cont ent;
(f) the share of biofuels and biogas produced from the feedstoc k listed in Part B of Annex IX in the energy cont ent of 
fuels and electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector shall, excep t in Cypr us and Malta, be limited to 1,7 %;
(g) in order to determine the amount of energy supplied to the transpor t sector , the values regar ding the energy 
content of transpor t fuels set out in Annex III shall be used;
(h) in order to deter mine the energy content of transpor t fuels not included in Annex III, the Member States shall use 
the relevant European standards for the deter mination of the calor ific values of fuels, or, where no European 
standard has been adopt ed for that purpose, the relevant ISO standards;
(i) the amount of renewable electr icity supplied to the transpor t sector shall be determined by multiplying the 
amount of electr icity supplied to that sector by the average share of renewable electr icity supplied in the territory 
of the Member State in the two previous years, unless electr icity is obtained from a direct connection to an 
installation generating renewable electr icity and supplied to the transpor t sector, in which case that electr icity 
shall be fully counted as renewable and electr icity generat ed by a solar -electr ic vehicle and used for the 
consump tion of the vehicle itself may be fully counted as renewable.
Member States may, where justified, increase the limit referred to in the first subparagraph, point (f), of this paragraph, 
taking into account the availability of feedstoc k listed in Part B of Annex IX. Any such increase shall be notified to the 
Commission, together with the reason theref or, and shall be subject to appro val by the Commission.
3. The Commission is empo wered to adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Article 35 to amend this Directive 
by adap ting the limit on the share of biofuels and biogas produced from the feedst ock listed in Part B of Annex IX on 
the basis of an assessment of the availability of feedstoc k. The limit shall be at least 1,7 %. If the Commission adopts 
such a delegat ed act, the limit set out in it shall also apply to Member States that have obtained an approval from the 
Commission to increase the limit, in accordance with paragraph 1, second subparagraph, or paragraph 2, second 
subparagraph,) of this Article, after a five-years transitional period, without prejudice to the right of the Member 
State to apply that new limit earlier . Member States may apply for a new appro val from the Commission for an 
increase from the limit laid down in the delegat ed act in accordance with paragraph 1, second subparagraph, or 
paragraph 2, second subparagraph, of this Article.
4. The Commission is empo wered to adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Article 35 to amend this Directive 
by adapting transpor t fuels and their energy cont ent as set out in Annex III in accordance with scientifi c and 
technical progress.
5. For the purpose of the calculations refer red to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, point (b), and in paragraph 2, 
first subparagraph, point (a), the amount of energy supplied to the mar itime transpor t sector shall, as a propor tion of 
that Member State’s gross final consump tion of energy , be considered to be no more than 13 %. For Cypr us and Malta, 
the amount of energy consumed in the mar itime transpor t sector shall, as a propor tion of those Member States’ gross 
final consump tion of energy , be considered to be no more than 5 %. This paragraph shall apply until 31 December 
2030 .OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  56/776. Where electr icity is used for the production of renewable fuels of non-biological origin, either directly or for the 
production of interm ediate products, the average share of electr icity from renewable sources in the countr y of 
production, as measured two years before the year in question, shall be used to determine the share of renewable 
energy .
Howe ver, electr icity obtained from a direct connection to an installation generating renewable electr icity may be fully 
counte d as renewable where it is used for the production of renewable fuels of non-biological origin, provided that 
the installation:
(a) comes into operation after, or at the same time as, the installation producing the renewable fuels of non-biological 
origin; and
(b) is not connected to the grid, or is connecte d to the grid but evidence can be provided that the electr icity 
concer ned has been supplied without taking electr icity from the grid.
Electr icity that has been taken from the grid may be fully counted as renewable provid ed that it is produced 
excl usively from renewable sources and the renewable proper ties and other appropr iate criteria have been 
demonstrated , ensur ing that the renewable proper ties of that electr icity are counted only once and only in one end- 
use sector .
By 31 December 2021 , the Commission shall adopt a delegat ed act in accordance with Article 35 to supplement this 
Directive by establishing a Union methodology setting out detailed rules by which economic operators are to comply 
with the requirements laid down in the second and third subparagraphs of this paragraph.
By 1 July 2028 , the Commission shall submit a repor t to the European Parliament and the Council assessing the 
impact of the Union methodology set out in accordance with the fourth subparagraph, including the impact of 
additionality and temporal and geographical correlation on production costs, greenhouse gas emissions savings, and 
the energy system .
That Commission repor t shall, in particular , assess the impact on the availabi lity and affordability of renewable fuels 
of non-biological origin for industr y and transpor t sectors and on the ability of the Union to achieve its target s for 
renewable fuels of non-biological origin taking into account the Union strategy for imported and domestic hydrog en 
in accordance with Article 22a, while minimising the increase in greenhouse gas emissions in the electr icity sector 
and the overall energy system. Where the repor t concludes that the requirements fall shor t of ensur ing suffi cient 
availability and affordability of renewable fuels of non-biological origin for industr y and transpor t sectors and do not 
substantially contr ibute to greenhouse gas emissions savings, energy system integration and the achieve ment of the 
Union targets for renewable fuels of non-biological origin set for 2030, the Commission shall review the Union 
methodology and shall, where appropr iate, adopt a delegat ed act in accordance with Article 35 to amend that 
methodology , provid ing the necessar y adjustments to the criteria laid down in the second and third subparagraphs of 
this paragraph in order to facilitate the ram p-up of the hydrog en industr y.’;
(18) Article 28 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 are deleted;
(b) paragraph 5 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘5. By 30 June 2024 , the Commission shall adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Article 35 to supplement 
this Directive by specifying the methodology to determine the share of biofuel, and biogas for transpor t, resulting 
from biomass being processed with fossil fuels in a common process.’ ;
(c) paragraph 7 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘7. By 31 December 2025 , in the conte xt of the biennial assessment of progress made pursuant to Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999, the Commission shall assess whether the oblig ation relating to advanced biofuels and biogas 
produced from feedstoc k listed in Part A of Annex IX to this Directive laid down in Article 25(1), first 
subparagraph, point (b), of this Directive effectively stimulates innovati on and ensures greenhouse gas emissions 
savings in the transpor t sector . The Commission shall analyse in that assessment whether the application of this 
Article effectively avoids the double-counting of renewable energy .OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  57/77The Commission shall, if appropr iate, submit a proposal to amend the obligation relating to advanced biofuels 
and biogas produced from feedstoc k listed in Part A of Annex IX laid down in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, 
point (b).’;
(19) Article 29 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 1 is amended as follows:
(i) in the first subparagraph, point (a) is replaced by the following:
‘(a) contr ibuting towards the renewable energy shares of Member States and the targets set in Article 3(1), 
Article 15a(1), Article 22a(1), Article 23(1), Article 24(4), and Article 25(1);’;
(ii) the second subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘How ever , biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from waste and residues, other than agricultural, 
aquaculture, fisher ies and forestr y residues, are required to fulfil only the greenhouse gas emissions saving 
criteria laid down in paragraph 10 in order to be taken into account for the purposes refer red to in points 
(a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of this paragraph. In the case of the use of mixed wastes , Member 
State s may require operat ors to apply mixed waste sorting systems that aim to remo ve fossil mat erials. This 
subparagraph shall also apply to waste and residues that are first processed into a product before being 
further processed into biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels.’;
(iii) the fourth subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘Biomass fuels shall fulfil the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in 
paragraphs 2 to 7 and 10 if used:
(a) in the case of solid biomass fuels, in installations producing electr icity , heating and cooling with a total 
rated ther mal input equal to or excee ding 7,5 MW ;
(b) in the case of gaseous biomass fuels, in installations producing electr icity , heating and cooling with a 
total rated ther mal input equal to or exceeding 2 MW ;
(c) in the case of installations producing gaseous biomass fuels with the followi ng average biomethane flow 
rate:
(i) abov e 200 m3 methane equivalent/h measured at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, 
namely 0 °C and 1 bar atmospher ic pressure;
(ii) if biogas is compo sed of a mixture of methane and non-combustible other gas, for the methane flow 
rate, the threshold set out in point (i), recalculat ed propor tionally to the volumetr ic share of methane 
in the mixture.
Member State s may apply the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria to installations with 
lower total rated ther mal input or biomethane flow rate.’;
(b) paragraph 3 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘3. Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from agricultural biomass take n into account for the 
purposes referred to in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall not be made from raw 
mater ial obtained from land with a high biodiversity value, namely land that had one of the followi ng statuses in 
or after Januar y 2008, irrespective of whether the land continues to have that status:
(a) primar y forest and other wooded land, namely forest and other wooded land of native species, where there is 
no clearly visible indication of human activity and the ecological processes are not signif icantly disturbed; and 
old growth forests as defined in the countr y where the forest is locat ed;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  58/77(b) highly biodiverse forest and other wooded land whic h is species-r ich and not degraded, and has been 
identif ied as being highly biodiverse by the relevant compet ent author ity, unless evidence is provi ded that 
the production of that raw mater ial did not interfere with those nature protection purposes;
(c) areas designate d:
(i) by law or by the relevant compet ent author ity for nature prote ction purposes, unless evidence is provided 
that the production of that raw mater ial did not interfere with those nature prot ection purposes; or
(ii) for the protection of rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems or species recognised by international 
agreements or included in lists drawn up by inter govern mental organisations or the Intern ational Union 
for the Conser vation of Nature, subject to their recognition in accordance with Article 30(4), first 
subparagraph, unless evidence is provid ed that the production of that raw mat erial did not interfe re with 
those nature prote ction purposes;
(d) highly biodiverse grassland spanning more than one hectare that is:
(i) natural, namely grassland that would remain grassland in the absence of human inter vention and that 
maintains the natural species compo sition and ecological charact eristics and processes; or
(ii) non-natural, namely grassland that would cease to be grassland in the absence of human inter vention and 
that is species-r ich and not degraded and has been identif ied as being highly biodiverse by the relevant 
compet ent author ity, unless evidence is provid ed that the harvesting of the raw mater ial is necessar y to 
preser ve its status as highly biodiverse grassland; or
(e) heathland.
Where the conditions set out in paragraph 6, points (a)(vi) and (vii), are not met, the first subparagraph of this 
paragraph, with the excep tion of point (c), also applies to biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from 
forest biomass.
The Commission may adopt implementing acts further specifying the criteria by whic h to determine whic h 
grassland is to be covered by the first subparagraph, point (d), of this paragraph. Those imple menting acts shall 
be adopt ed in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 34(3).’ ;
(c) in paragraph 4, the followi ng subparagraph is added:
‘Where the conditions set out in paragraph 6, points (a)(vi) and (vii), are not met, the first subparagraph of this 
paragraph, with the excep tion of points (b) and (c), and the second subparagraph of this paragraph also apply to 
biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from forest biomass.’;
(d) paragraph 5 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘5. Biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels produced from agricultural biomass take n into account for the 
purposes refer red to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), shall not be made from raw 
mater ial obtained from land that was peatland in Januar y 2008, unless evidence is provid ed that the cultivation 
and harvesting of that raw mater ial does not involve drainag e of previously undrained soil. Where the conditions 
set out in paragraph 6, points (a)(vi) and (vii), are not met, this paragraph also applies to biofuels, bioliquids and 
biomass fuels produced from forest biomass.;’
(e) paragraph 6 is amended as follows:
(i) in point (a), points (iii) and (iv) are replaced by the followi ng:
‘(iii) that areas designat ed by intern ational or national law or by the relevant compet ent author ity for nature 
protection purposes, including in wetlands, grassland, heathland and peatlands, are prote cted with the 
aim of preser ving biodiversity and preventing habitat destr uction;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  59/77(iv) that harvesting is carried out consider ing mainte nance of soil quality and biodiversity in accordance 
with sustainable forest management principles, with the aim of preventing any adverse impact, in a 
way that avoids harvesting of stum ps and roots, degradation of primar y forests, and of old growth 
forests as defined in the countr y where the forest is located, or their convers ion into plantation forests, 
and harvesting on vulnerable soils, that harvesting is carried out in compliance with maximum 
thresholds for large clear -cuts as defined in the countr y where the forest is locat ed and with locally and 
ecologically appropr iate retention thresholds for deadwo od extraction and that harvesting is carried out 
in compl iance with requirements to use logging systems that minimise any adverse impact on soil 
quality , including soil compacti on, and on biodiversity features and habitats:’;
(ii) in point (a), the follo wing points are added:
‘(vi) that forests in which the forest biomass is harvested do not stem from the lands that have the statuses 
referred to in paragraph 3, points (a), (b), (d) and (e), paragraph 4, point (a), and paragraph 5, 
respectively under the same conditions of determination of the status of land specified in those 
paragraphs; and
(vii) that installations producing biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels from forest biomass, issue a 
statement of assurance, under pinned by compan y-level intern al processes, for the purpose of the 
audits conduct ed pursuant to Article 30(3), that the forest biomass is not sourced from the lands 
referred to in point (vi) of this subparagraph.’;
(iii) in point (b), points (iii) and (iv) are replaced by the followi ng:
‘(iii) that areas designat ed by intern ational or national law or by the relevant compet ent author ity for nature 
protection purposes, including in wetlands, grassland, heathland and peatlands, are prote cted with the 
aim of preser ving biodiversity and preventing habitat destr uction, unless evidence is provid ed that the 
harvesting of that raw mater ial does not interfere with those nature protection purposes;
(iv) that harvesting is carried out consider ing maintenanc e of soil quality and biodiversity , in accordance 
with sustainable forest management principles, with the aim of preventing any adverse impact, in a 
way that avoids harvesting of stum ps and roots, degradation of primar y forests, and of old growth 
forests as defined in the countr y where the forest is located, or their convers ion into plantation forests, 
and harvesting on vulnerable soils, that harvesting is carried out in compliance with maximum 
thresholds for large clear -cuts as defined in the countr y where the forest is locat ed, and with locally and 
ecologically appropr iate retention thresholds for deadwo od extraction and that harvesting is carried out 
in compl iance with requirements to use logging systems that minimise any adverse impact on soil 
quality , including soil compacti on, and on biodiversity features and habitats; and’;
(f) the followi ng paragraphs are inser ted:
‘7a. The production of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels from domestic forest biomass shall be consistent 
with Member States’ commitments and targe ts laid down in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2018/841 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council (*) and with the policies and measures descr ibed by the Member States 
in their integrat ed national energy and climat e plans submitted pursuant to Articles 3 and 14 of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999.
7b. As part of their final update d integrat ed national energy and climate plan to be submitted by 30 June 2024
pursuant to Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999, Member States shall include all of the followi ng:
(a) an assessment of the domestic supply of forest biomass available for energy purposes in 2021-2030 in 
accordance with the criteria laid down in this Article;
(b) an assessment of the compati bility of the projected use of forest biomass for the production of energy with 
the Member State s’ target s and budget s for 2026 to 2030 laid down in Article 4 of Regulation 
(EU) 2018/841; andOJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  60/77(c) a descr iption of the national measures and policies ensur ing compati bility with those target s and budge ts.
Member State s shall repor t to the Commission on the measures and policies refer red in the first subparagraph, 
point (c), of this paragraph as part of their integrat ed national energy and climate progress repor ts submitt ed 
pursuant to Article 17 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EU) 2018/841 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the inclusion of 
greenhouse gas emissions and remo vals from land use, land use change and forestr y in the 2030 climat e and 
energy framewor k, and amending Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 and Decision No 529/2013/EU (OJ L 156, 
19.6.2018, p. 1).’;
(g) in paragraph 10, first subparagraph, point (d) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(d) for electr icity , heating and cooling production from biomass fuels used in installations that started operating 
after 20 November 2023 , at least 80 %;
(e) for electr icity , heating and cooling production from biomass fuels used in installations with a total rated 
ther mal input equal to or excee ding 10 MW that started operating between 1 Januar y 2021 and 
20 November 2023 , at least 70 % until 31 December 2029 , and at least 80 % from 1 Januar y 2030 ;
(f) for electr icity , heating and cooling production from gaseous biomass fuels used in installations with a total 
rated ther mal input equal to or lowe r than 10 MW that started operating between 1 Januar y 2021 and 
20 November 2023 , at least 70 % before they have been operating for 15 years, and at least 80 % after they 
have been in operation for 15 years;
(g) for electr icity , heating and cooling production from biomass fuels used in installations with a total rated 
ther mal input equal to or exceed ing 10 MW that started operating before 1 Januar y 2021 , at least 80 % after 
they have been operating for 15 years, at the earliest from 1 Januar y 2026 and at the lates t from 
31 December 2029 ;
(h) for electr icity , heating and cooling production from gaseous biomass fuels used in installations with a total 
rated ther mal input equal to or lower than 10 MW that started operating before 1 Januar y 2021 , at least 
80 % after they have been operating for 15 years and at the earliest from 1 Januar y 2026 .’;
(h) in paragraph 13, points (a) and (b) are replaced by the followi ng:
‘(a) installations located in an outermost region as refer red to in Article 349 TFEU to the extent that such facilities 
produce electr icity or heating or cooling from biomass fuels and bioliquids or produce biofuels; and
(b) biomass fuels and bioliquids used in the installations refer red to in point (a) of this subparagraph and biofuels 
produced in those installations, irrespective of the place of origin of that biomass, provided that such criteria 
are objectively justified on the grounds that their aim is to ensure, for that outermost region, access to safe 
and secure energy and a smooth phase-in of the criteria laid down in paragraphs 2 to 7 and 10 and 11 of 
this Article and thereby incentivise the transition from fossil fuels to sustainable biofuels, bioliquids and 
biomass fuels.’;
(i) the followi ng paragraph is added:
‘15. Until 31 December 2030 , energy from biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels may also be take n into 
account for the purposes referred to in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, points (a), (b) and (c), of this Article, 
where:
(a) suppor t was granted before 20 November 2023 , in accordance with the sustainability and greenhouse gas 
emissions saving criteria set out in Article 29 in its version in force on 29 Sept ember 2020 ; andOJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  61/77(b) suppor t was grant ed in the form of a long-term suppor t for which a fixed amount has been deter mined at the 
start of the suppor t period and provided that a correction mechanis m to ensure the absence of 
overcom pensation is in place.’ ;
(20) the follo wing Article is inser ted:
‘Article 29a
Greenhouse gas emissions saving criter ia for renewable fuels of non-biological origin and recy cled carbon 
fuels
1. Energy from renewable fuels of non-biological origin shall be counte d towards Member States’ shares of 
renewable energy and the targets referred to in Articles 3(1), 15a(1), 22a(1), 23(1), 24(4) and 25(1) only if the 
greenhouse gas emissions savings from the use of those fuels are at least 70 %.
2. Energy from recy cled carbon fuels may be counted towards the targets referred to in Article 25(1), first 
subparagraph, point (a), only if the greenhouse gas emissions savings from the use of those fuels are at least 70 %.
3. The Commission is empo wered to adopt delegat ed acts in accordance with Article 35 to supplement this 
Directive by specifying the methodology for assessing greenhouse gas emissions savings from renewable fuels of 
non-biological origin and from recy cled carbon fuels. The methodology shall ensure that credit for avoided emissions 
is not given for CO 2 from fossil sources the capture of which has already received an emission credit under other 
provis ions of law. The methodology shall cover the life-cy cle greenhouse gas emissions and consider indirect 
emissions resulting from the diversion of rigid inputs such as wast es used for the production of recy cled carbon fuels.’ ;
(21) Article 30 is amended as follows :
(a) in paragraph 1, first subparagraph, the introduct ory phrase is replaced by the follo wing:
‘1. Where renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels are to be count ed towards the targets refer red to in 
Article 3(1), Article 15a(1), Article 22a(1), Article 23(1), Article 24(4) and Article 25(1), Member States shall 
require economic operat ors to show , by means of mandatory independent and transparent audits, in accordance 
with the implementing act adopt ed pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Article, that the sustainability and 
greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10) and Article 29a(1) and (2) for 
renewable fuels and recy cled-carbon fuels have been fulfilled. To that end, they shall require economic operat ors 
to use a mass balance system whic h:’;
(b) paragraph 2 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. Where a consignment is processed, information on the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving 
charact eristics of the consignment shall be adjuste d and assigned to the output in accordance with the following 
rules:
(a) when the processing of a consignment of raw mater ial yields only one output that is intended for the 
production of biofuels, bioliquids or biomass fuels, renewable fuels of non-biological origin, or recy cled 
carbon fuels, the size of the consignment and the relat ed quantities of sustainability and greenhouse gas 
emissions saving character istics shall be adjusted applying a conversion factor representing the ratio between 
the mass of the output that is intended for such production and the mass of the raw mate rial entering the 
process;
(b) when the processing of a consignment of raw mat erial yields more than one output that is intended for the 
production of biofuels, bioliquids or biomass fuels, renewable fuels of non-biological origin, or recy cled 
carbon fuels, for each output a separate conver sion factor shall be applied and a separate mass balance shall 
be used.’ ;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  62/77(c) in paragraph 3, the first and second subparagraphs are replaced by the followi ng:
‘Member States shall take measures to ensure that economic operat ors submit reliable information regarding the 
compliance with the sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) 
and (10) and Article 29a(1) and (2), and that economic operators make available to the relevant Member State, 
upon request, the data used to develop that information. Member States shall require economic operat ors to 
arrange for an adequate standard of independent auditing of the information submitted , and to provid e evidence 
that this has been done. In order to compl y with Article 29(3), points (a), (b), (d) and (e), Article 29(4), point (a), 
Article 29(5), Article 29(6), point (a), and Article 29(7), point (a), the first or second party auditing may be used 
up to the first gather ing point of the forest biomass. The auditing shall verify that the syste ms used by economic 
operators are accurate, reliable and protect ed against fraud, including verification ensur ing that mate rials are not 
intentionall y modified or discarded so that the consignment or part thereof could become a waste or residue. 
The auditing shall also evaluate the frequency and methodology of sampli ng and the robustness of the data.
The oblig ations laid down in this paragraph shall apply regar dless of whether renewable fuels and recy cled carbon 
fuels are produced within or are imported into the Union. Information about the geographic origin and feedstoc k 
type of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels per fuel supplier shall be made available to consumers in an up-to- 
date , easily accessible, and user -friendly manner on the websites of operat ors, suppliers or the relevant compet ent 
author ities and shall be update d on an annual basis.’;
(d) in paragraph 4, the first subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘4. The Commission may decide that volun tary national or international schemes setting standards for the 
production of renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels, provide accurat e data on greenhouse gas emissions 
savings for the purposes of Article 29(10) and Article 29a(1) and (2), demonstrate compliance with Article 27(6) 
and Article 31a(5), or demonstrate that consignments of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels compl y with the 
sustainability criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7). When demonstrating that the criteria laid down in 
Article 29(6) and (7) are met, the operators may provid e the required evidence directly at sourcing area level. The 
Commission may recognise areas for the protection of rare, threatened or endangered ecosystems or species 
recognised by international agreements or included in lists drawn up by inter govern mental organisations or the 
Internati onal Union for the Conser vation of Nature for the purposes of Article 29(3), first subparagraph, point 
(c)(ii).’ ;
(e) paragraph 6 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘6. Member States may set up national schemes where compliance with the sustainability and greenhouse gas 
emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10) and Article 29a(1) and (2), in accordance with 
the methodology developed under Article 29a(3), is verified throughout the entire chain of custody involving 
compet ent author ities. Those schemes may also be used to verify the accuracy and compl eteness of the 
information included by economic operators in the Union database, to demonstrat e compl iance with 
Article 27(6) and for the certification of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels with low indirect land-use change- 
risk.
A Member State may notify such a national schem e to the Commission. The Commission shall give priority to the 
assessment of such a sche me in order to facilitate mutual bilate ral and multilat eral recognition of those schem es. 
The Commission may decide, by means of implementing acts, whether such a notified national schem e compl ies 
with the conditions laid down in this Directive. Those implementing acts shall be adopt ed in accordance with the 
examination procedure refer red to in Article 34(3).
Where the Commission decides that the national sche me compl ies with conditions laid down in this Directive, 
other sche mes recognised by the Commission in accordance with this Article shall not refuse mutual recognition 
with that Member State’s national sche me as regar ds verification of compl iance with the criteria for which it has 
been recognised by the Commission.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  63/77For installations producing electr icity , heating and cooling with a total rated ther mal input between 7,5 and 20 
MW , Member States may establish simplified national verification schemes to ensure the fulfilment of the 
sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria set out in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10). For the same 
installations, the implementing acts provi ded for in paragraph 8 of this Article shall set out the unif orm 
conditions for simplified voluntar y verification schemes to ensure the fulfilment of the sustainability and 
greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria set out in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10).’ ;
(f) in paragraph 9, the first subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘9. Where an economic operat or provides evidence or data obtained in accordance with a scheme that has 
been the subject of a decision pursuant to paragraph 4 or 6, a Member State shall not require the economic 
operator to provide further evidence of compl iance with the elements covered by the schem e for which the 
scheme has been recognised by the Commission.’ ;
(g) paragraph 10 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘10. At the request of a Member State, which may be based on the request of an economic operat or, the 
Commission shall, on the basis of all available evidence, examine whether the sustainability and greenhouse gas 
emissions saving criteria laid down in Article 29(2) to (7) and (10) and Article 29a(1) and (2) in relation to a 
source of renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels have been met.
Within six months of receipt of such a request, the Commission shall, by means of imp lementing acts, decide 
whether the Member State concer ned may either:
(a) take into account the renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels from that source for the purposes referred to 
in points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 29(1); or
(b) by way of derogation from paragraph 9, require suppliers of the source of renewable fuels and recy cled 
carbon fuels to provi de further evidence of compl iance with those sustainability and greenhouse gas 
emissions saving criteria and those greenhouse gas emissions savings thresholds.
The implementing acts refer red to in the second subparagraph of this paragraph shall be adop ted in accordance 
with the examination procedure refer red to in Article 34(3).’ ;
(22) the follo wing article is inser ted:
‘Article 31a
Union database
1. By 21 Novem ber 2024 , the Commission shall ensure that a Union database is set up to enable the tracing of 
liquid and gaseous renewable fuels and recy cled carbon fuels (the ‘Union database ’).
2. Member State s shall require the relevant economic operators to enter in a timely manner accurate data into the 
Union database on the transactions made and the sustainability charact eristics of the fuels subject to those 
transactions, including their life-cy cle greenhouse gas emissions, starting from their point of production to the 
moment they are placed on the mark et in the Union. For the purpose of entering data into the Union database, the 
inter connected gas system shall be considered to be a sing le mass balance system. Data on the injection and 
withdra wal of renewable gaseous fuels shall be provided in the Union database. Data on whether suppor t has been 
provid ed for the production of a specific consignment of fuel, and if so, on the type of suppor t sche me, shall also be 
entered into the Union database. Those data may be entered into the Union database via national databases.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  64/77Where appropr iate for the purpose of impro ving the traceability of data along the entire supply chain, the 
Commission is empo wered to adopt delega ted acts in accordance with Article 35 to supplement this Directive by 
further exte nding the scope of the data to be included in the Union database to cover relevant data from the point of 
production or collection of the raw mate rial used for the fuel production.
Member States shall require fuel suppliers to enter the data necessar y to verify compliance with the requirements laid 
down in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, into the Union database.
Notwithstanding the first, second and third subparagraphs, for gaseo us fuels injected into the Union’s interconnect ed 
gas infrastr ucture, economic operators shall, in the event that the Member State decides to compl ement a mass 
balance system by a system of guarant ees of origin, enter into the Union database data on the transactions made and 
on the sustainability charact eristics and other relevant data, such as greenhouse gas emissions of the fuels up to the 
injection point to the inter connected gas infrastr ucture.
3. Member States shall have access to the Union database for the purposes of monitori ng and data verification.
4. Where guarant ees of origin have been issued for the production of a consignment of renewable gas, Member 
States shall ensure that those guarantees of origin are transferred to the Union database at the moment when a 
consignment of renewable gas is register ed in the Union database and are cancelled after the consignment of 
renewable gas is withdra wn from the Union’s inter connected gas infrastr ucture. Such guarant ees of origin, once 
transferr ed, shall not be tradable outside the Union database.
5. Member State s shall ensure in their national lega l framewor k that the accuracy and compl eteness of the data 
entered by economic operat ors into the database is verified, for instance by using certificat ion bodies in the 
framew ork of voluntar y or national schem es recognised by the Commission pursuant to Article 30(4), (5) and (6) 
and whic h may be compl emented by a syste m of guarant ees of origin.
Such voluntary or national schemes may use third-par ty data systems as interm ediar ies to collect the data, provid ed 
that such use has been notifi ed to the Commission.
Each Member State may use an already existing national database aligned to and linked with the Union database via an 
interfa ce, or establish a national database, whic h can be used by economic operators as a tool for collecting and 
declar ing data and for entering and transferr ing those data into the Union database, provid ed that:
(a) the national database compl ies with the Union database including in terms of the timeliness of data transmission, 
the typology of data sets transferr ed, and the protocols for data quality and data verification;
(b) Member States ensure that the data entered into the national database are instantly transferr ed to the Union 
database.
Member State s may establish national databases in accordance with national law or practice, such as to take into 
account stricter national requirements, as regar ds sustainability criteria. Such national databases shall not hinder the 
overall traceability of sustainable consignments of raw mate rials or fuels to be entered into the Union database in 
accordance with this Directive.
The verification of the quality of the data entered into the Union database by means of national databases, the 
sustainability charact eristics of the fuels relat ed to those data, and the final appro val of transactions shall be carried 
out through the Union database alone. The accuracy and complet eness of those data shall be verified in accordance 
with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 (*). They may be check ed by certification bodies.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  65/77Member State s shall notify the detailed features of their national database to the Commission. Following that 
notificati on, the Commission shall assess whether the national database complies with the requirements laid down in 
the third subparagraph. If that is not the case, the Commission may require Member States to take appropr iate steps to 
ensure compl iance with those requirements.
6. Aggreg ated data from the Union database shall be made publicly available, with due regard to the protection of 
commercially sensitive information, and shall be kept up-to -date. The Commission shall publish and make publicly 
available annual repor ts about the data contained in the Union database, including the quantities, the geographical 
origin and feedstoc k type of fuels.
_____________
(*) Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/996 of 14 June 2022 on rules to verify sustainability and 
greenhouse gas emissions saving criteria and low indirect land-use chang e-risk criteria (OJ L 168, 27.6.2022, 
p. 1).’;
(23) Article 33 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 3 is amended as follows:
(i) the first subparagraph is replaced by the following:
‘3. By 31 December 2027 , the Commission shall submit, if appropr iate, a legislative proposal on the 
regulatory framew ork for the promotion of energy from renewable sources for the period after 2030.’ ;
(ii) the following subparagraph is added:
‘When prepar ing the legislative proposal refer red to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph the 
Commission shall take into account, where appropr iate:
(a) the advice of the European Scientific Advisor y Board on Climate Change established under Article 10a of 
Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (*);
(b) the projected indicative Union greenhouse gas budget as set out in Article 4(4) of Regulation 
(EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council (**);
(c) the integrated national energy and climate plans submitted by Member States by 30 June 2024 pursuant 
to Article 14(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999;
(d) the exper ience gain ed by the implementation of this Directive, including its sustainability and greenhouse 
gas emissions saving criteria; and
(e) technological developments in energy from renewable sources.
_____________
(*) Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 Apr il 2009 on the 
European Environment Age ncy and the European Environment Information and Obser vation Network 
(OJ L 126, 21.5.2009, p. 13).
(**) Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 establishing 
the framew ork for achi eving climat e neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) No 401/2009 and 
(EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’) (OJ L 243, 9.7.2021, p. 1)’;
(b) the followi ng paragraph is inser ted:
‘(3a) The Commission shall assess the application of the obligations laid down in Article 29(7a) and (7b) and 
their impact on ensur ing the sustainability of biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels.’ ;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  66/77(24) Article 35 is amended as follows :
(a) paragraph 2 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. The power to adop t delegat ed acts refer red to in Article 8(3), second subparagraph„ Article 26(2), fourth 
subparagraph, Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph, Article 27(3), Article 27(4), Article 27(6), fourth subparagraph, 
Article 28(5), Article 28(6), second subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article 31(5), second subparagraph, and 
Article 31a(2), second subparagraph, shall be confe rred on the Commission for a period of five years from 
20 November 2023 . The Commission shall draw up a repor t in respect of the delegation of power not later than 
nine months before the end of the five-y ear period. The delegatio n of power shall be tacitly extended for periods 
of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extensi on not later than 
three months before the end of each period.’ ;
(b) paragraph 4 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘4. The delegatio n of power referred to in Article 7(3), fifth subparagraph, Article 8(3), second subparagraph, 
Article 26(2), fourth subparagraph, Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph, Article 27(3), article 27(4), Article 27(6), 
fourth subparagraph, Article 28(5), Article 28(6), second subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article 31(5), and 
Article 31a(2), second subparagraph, may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. 
A decision to revok e shall put an end to the delegatio n of the power specifi ed in that decision. It shall take effect 
the day followi ng the publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date 
specifi ed therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegat ed acts already in force.’ ;
(c) paragraph 7 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘7. A delegat ed act adopt ed pursuant to Article 7(3), fifth subparagraph, Article 8(3), second subparagraph, 
Article 26(2), fourth subparagraph, Article 26(2) fifth subparagraph, Article 27(3), Article 27(4), Article 27(6), 
fourth subparagraph, Article 28(5), Article 28(6), second subparagraph, Article 29a(3), Article 31(5), or 
Article 31a(2), second subparagraph, shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the 
European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European 
Parliament and to the Council or if, before the expir y of that period, the European Parliament and the Council 
have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be exte nded by two months at 
the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.’ ;
(25) the Annex es are amended in accordance with the Annexes to this Directive.
Article 2
Amendments to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999
Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 is amended as follows :
(1) Article 2 is amended as follows:
(a) point (11) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(11) “the Union’s 2030 targe ts for energy and climate” means the Union-wide binding target for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions in 2030 refer red to in Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2021/1119, the Union’s 
binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, the Union- 
level target for impro ving energy efficiency in 2030 referred to in Article 4(1) of Directive (EU) 2023/1791 
of the European Parliament and of the Council (*), and the 15 % electr icity interconnection targe t for 2030 
or any subsequent targe ts in that regard agreed by the European Council or by the European Parliament and 
by the Council for 2030.
_____________
(*) Directive (EU) 2023/1791 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2023 on energy 
efficiency and amending Regulation (EU) 2023/955 (OJ L 231, 20.9.2023, p. 1).’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  67/77(b) in point 20, point (b) is replaced by the following:
‘(b) in the conte xt of Commission recommendations based on the assessment pursuant to Article 29(1), point (b), 
with regar d to energy from renewable sources, a Member State’s early implementation of its contr ibution to 
the Union’s binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 as 
measured against its national referen ce points for renewable energy ;’;
(2) in Article 4, point (a)(2) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(2) with respect to renewable energy:
With a view to achi eving the Union’s binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of Directive 
(EU) 2018/2001, a contr ibution to that target in term s of the Member State’s share of energy from renewable 
sources in gross final consum ption of energy in 2030, with an indicative traject ory for that contr ibution from 
2021 onwards. By 2022, the indicative traject ory shall reac h a reference point of at least 18 % of the tota l 
increase in the share of energy from renewable sources between that Member State’s binding 2020 national 
target , and its contr ibution to the 2030 targe t. By 2025, the indicative trajector y shall reac h a reference point of at 
least 43 % of the total increase in the share of energy from renewable sources between that Member State’s binding 
2020 national targe t and its contr ibution to the 2030 targe t. By 2027, the indicative trajector y shall reach a 
reference point of at least 65 % of the tota l increase in the share of energy from renewable sources between that 
Member State’s binding 2020 national target and its contr ibution to the 2030 target.
By 2030, the indicative traject ory shall reach at least the Member State’s planned contr ibution. If a Member State 
expects to surpass its binding 2020 national target, its indicative traject ory may start at the level it is projected to 
achi eve. The Member States’ indicative trajector ies, taken together , shall add up to the Union reference points 
in 2022, 2025 and 2027 and to the Union’s binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001. Separate ly from its contr ibution to the Union targe t and its indicative trajector y for 
the purposes of this Regulation, a Member State shall be free to indicate higher ambitions for national policy 
purposes.’;
(3) in Article 5, paragraph 2 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘2. Member States shall collectively ensure that the sum of their contr ibutions amounts to at least the level of the 
Union’s binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.’ ;
(4) in Article 29, paragraph 2 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘2. In the area of renewable energy , as part of its assessment referred to in paragraph 1, the Commission shall assess 
the progress made in the share of energy from renewable sources in the Union’s gross final consump tion of energy on 
the basis of an indicative Union traject ory that starts from 20 % in 2020, reach es reference points of at least 18 % 
in 2022, 43 % in 2025 and 65 % in 2027 of the total increase in the share of energy from renewable sources between 
the Union’ s 2020 renewable energy target and the Union’s 2030 renewable energy targe t, and reach es the Union’s 
binding target for renewable energy for 2030 set in Article 3(1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.’ .
Article 3
Amendments to Directiv e 98/70/EC
Directive 98/70/EC is amended as follows:
(1) Article 1 is replaced by the followi ng:OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  68/77‘Article 1
Scope
This Directive sets, in respect of road vehicles, and non-road mobile machiner y, including inland water way vessels 
when not at sea, agricultural and forestr y tractors, and recreational craft when not at sea, technical specif ications on 
health and environmental grounds for fuels to be used with positive ignition and compression-ignition engines, taking 
account of the technical requirements of those engines.’ ;
(2) in Article 2, points 8 and 9 are replaced by the follo wing:
‘8. “supplier” means fuel supplier as defined in Article 2, second paragraph, point (38), of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council (*);
9. “biofuels” means biofuels as defined in Article 2, second paragraph, point (33), of Directive (EU) 2018/2001;
_____________
(*) Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion 
of the use of energy from renewable sources (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82).’;
(3) Article 4 is amended as follows:
(a) in paragraph 1, the second subparagraph is replaced by the followi ng:
‘Member States shall require suppliers to ensure the placing on the market of diesel with a fatty acid meth yl ester 
(FAME) content of up to 7 %.’;
(b) paragraph 2 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘2. Member States shall ensure that the maximum permissible sulphur cont ent of gas oils intended for use by 
non-road mobile machi nery, including inland water way vessels, agricultural and forestr y tract ors and recreational 
craft is 10 mg/kg. Member States shall ensure that liquid fuels other than those gas oils may be used in inland 
water way vessels and recreational craft only if the sulphur conte nt of those liquid fuels does not exceed the 
maximum permissible content of those gas oils.’ ;
(4) Articles 7a to 7e are delet ed;
(5) Article 9 is amended as follows:
(a) in paragraph 1, points (g), (h), (i) and (k) are delet ed;
(b) paragraph 2 is deleted;
(6) Annex es I, II, IV and V are amended in accordance with Annex II to this Directive.
Article 4
Transitional provisions
1. Member State s shall ensure that the data collect ed and repor ted to the author ity designat ed by the Member State with 
respect to the year 2023 or a part thereof in accordance with Article 7a(1), third subparagraph, and Article 7a(7) of 
Directive 98/70/EC, whic h are deleted by Article 3, point (4), of this Directive, are submitted to the Commission.
2. The Commission shall include the data referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article in any repor t it is obliged to submit 
under Directive 98/70/EC.
Article 5
Transposition
1. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessar y to compl y with this 
Directive by 21 May 2025 .OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  69/77By way of deroga tion from the first subparagraph of this paragraph, Member State s shall bring into force the laws, 
regulations and administrative provisions necessar y to compl y with Article 1, point (6), with regard to Article 15e of 
Directive (EU) 2018/2001, and Article 1, point (7), with regard to Articles 16, 16b,16c, 16d, 16e and 16f of that Directive, 
by 1 July 2024 .
They shall immediately inform the Commission of those measures.
When Member States adop t those measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompan ied by such 
a reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by 
Member States.
2. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of the main measures of national law whic h they adopt 
in the field covered by this Directive.
Article 6
Repeal
Council Directive (EU) 2015/652 is repealed with effect from 1 Januar y 2025 .
Article 7
Entr y into force
This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the 
European Union.
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.
Done at Strasbourg, 18 October 2023 .
For the Europ ean Parliament
The President
R. METSOL AFor the Council
The President
J. M. ALBA RES BUENOOJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  70/77ANNEX I 
The Annexes to Directive (EU) 2018/2001 are amended as follows:
(1) in Annex I, the final row in the table is deleted;
(2) the following Annex is inser ted:
‘ANNEX IA
NATIONAL HEA TING AND COOLING SHARES OF ENER GY FROM RENEW ABLE SOUR CES IN GROSS FINAL CONSUMPTION 
OF ENER GY FOR 2020-2030 
Additional top-up s to 
Article 23(1)
(in percentage points)
for the period 
2021-2025 (*)Additional top-up s to 
Article 23(1)
(in percentage points)
for the period 
2026-2030 (**)Resulting shares including 
top-ups without wast e heat 
and cold
(in percentage points)
Belgium 1,0 0,7 1,8
Bulg aria 0,7 0,4 1,5
Czec hia 0,8 0,5 1,6
Denmark 1,2 1,1 1,6
German y 1,0 0,7 1,8
Eston ia 1,3 1,2 1,7
Ireland 2,3 2,0 3,1
Greece 1,3 1,0 2,1
Spain 0,9 0,6 1,7
France 1,3 1,0 2,1
Croatia 0,8 0,5 1,6
Italy 1,1 0,8 1,9
Cypr us 0,8 0,5 1,6
Latvia 0,7 0,6 1,1
Lithuania 1,7 1,6 2,1
Luxembourg 2,3 2,0 3,1
Hung ary 0,9 0,6 1,7
Malta 0,8 0,5 1,6
Netherlands 1,1 0,8 1,9
Austr ia 1,0 0,7 1,8
Poland 0,8 0,5 1,6
Portugal 0,7 0,4 1,5
Romania 0,8 0,5 1,6OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  71/77Additional top-up s to 
Article 23(1)
(in percentage points)
for the period 
2021-2025 (*)Additional top-up s to 
Article 23(1)
(in percentage points)
for the period 
2026-2030 (**)Resulting shares including 
top-ups without wast e heat 
and cold
(in percentage points)
Slovenia 0,8 0,5 1,6
Slovakia 0,8 0,5 1,6
Finland 0,6 0,5 1,0
Sweden 0,7 0,7 0,7
(*) The flexibilities of Article 23(2), points (b) and (c), where they were taken into account when calculating the top-ups and resulting 
shares.
(**) The flexibilities of Article 23(2), points (b) and (c), where they were taken into account when calculating the top-ups and resulting 
shares.’;
(3) Annex III is replaced by the follo wing:
‘ANNEX III 
ENER GY CONTENT OF FUELS 
FuelEnergy content by weight
(lower calor ific value, 
MJ/kg)Energy conten t by volume
(lower calor ific value, MJ/l)
FUELS FROM BIOMASS AND/OR BIOMASS PROCESSING 
OPERA TIONS
Bio-Propane 46 24
Pure vege table oil (oil produced from oil plants through 
pressing, extraction or comparable procedures, crude or refined 
but chemically unmodif ied)37 34
Biodiesel - fatty acid meth yl ester (methyl-est er produced from 
oil of biomass origin)37 33
Biodiesel - fatty acid ethyl ester (ethyl-ester produced from oil of 
biomass origin)38 34
Biogas that can be purified to natural gas quality 50 -
Hydrotreat ed (ther moche mically treated with hydrogen) oil of 
biomass origin, to be used for replacement of diesel44 34
Hydrotreat ed (ther moche mically treated with hydrogen) oil of 
biomass origin, to be used for replacement of petrol45 30
Hydrotreat ed (ther moche mically treated with hydrogen) oil of 
biomass origin, to be used for replacement of jet fuel44 34
Hydrotreat ed oil (ther mochemicall y treated with hydrog en) of 
biomass origin, to be used for replacement of liquefi ed 
petroleum gas46 24OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  72/77FuelEnergy content by weight
(lower calor ific value, 
MJ/kg)Energy conten t by volume
(lower calor ific value, MJ/l)
Co-processed oil (processed in a refiner y simultaneously with 
fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin to be used for 
replacement of diesel43 36
Co-processed oil (processed in a refiner y simultaneously with 
fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to 
replace petrol44 32
Co-processed oil (processed in a refiner y simultaneously with 
fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to 
replace jet fuel43 33
Co-processed oil (processed in a refiner y simultaneously with 
fossil fuel) of biomass or pyrolysed biomass origin, to be used to 
replace liquefi ed petroleum gas46 23
RENEW ABLE FUELS THA T CAN BE PRODUCED FROM 
VARIOUS RENEW ABLE SOUR CES, INCL UDING BIOMASS
Methanol from renewable sources 20 16
Ethanol from renewable sources 27 21
Propanol from renewable sources 31 25
Butanol from renewable sources 33 27
Fischer-Tropsch diesel (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of 
synthetic hydrocarbons to be used for replacement of diesel)44 34
Fischer-Tropsch petrol (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of 
synthetic hydrocarbons produced from biomass, to be used for 
replacement of petrol)44 33
Fischer-Tropsch jet fuel (a synthetic hydrocarbon or mixture of 
synthetic hydrocarbons produced from biomass, to be used for 
replacement of jet fuel)44 33
Fischer-Tropsch liquefi ed petroleum gas (a synthetic 
hydrocarbon or mixture of synthetic hydrocarbons, to be used 
for replacement of liquefied petroleum gas46 24
DME (dimeth ylether) 28 19
Hydroge n from renewable sources 120 -
ETBE (ethyl -tertio-butyl-ether produced on the basis of ethanol) 36 (of which 33 % from 
renewable sources)27 (of which 33 % from 
renewable sources)OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  73/77FuelEnergy content by weight
(lower calor ific value, 
MJ/kg)Energy conten t by volume
(lower calor ific value, MJ/l)
MTBE (methyl-t ertio-butyl-ether produced on the basis of 
methanol)35 (of which 22 % from 
renewable sources)26 (of which 22 % from 
renewable sources)
TAEE (tertiary-am yl-ethyl-ether produced on the basis of 
ethanol)38 (of which 29 % from 
renewable sources)29 (of which 29 % from 
renewable sources)
TAME (tertiary-am yl-methyl-ether produced on the basis of 
methanol)36 (of which 18 % from 
renewable sources)28 (of which 18 % from 
renewable sources)
THxEE (tertiary-hexyl-ethyl-ether produced on the basis of 
ethanol)38 (of which 25 % from 
renewable sources)30 (of which 25 % from 
renewable sources)
THxME (tertiary-hexyl-methyl-ether produced on the basis of 
methanol)38 of which 14 % from 
renewable sources)30 (of which 14 % from 
renewable sources)
NON-RENEW ABLE FUELS
Petrol 43 32
Diesel 43 36
Jet fuel 43 34
Hydroge n from non-renewable sources 120 -’
(4) Annex IV is amended as follows:
(a) the title is replaced by the followi ng:
‘TRAINING AND CERTIFICA TION OF INST ALLERS AND DESIGNERS OF RENEW ABLE ENER GY INST ALL ATIONS’; 
(b) the introduct ory sentence and the points 1, 2 and 3 are replaced by the followi ng:
‘The certification or equivalent qualifi cation schemes and training programmes refer red to in Article 18(3) shall be 
based on the following criteria:
1. The certificat ion or equivalent qualific ation process shall be transparent and clearly defined by the Member 
States or by the administrative body that they appoint.
1a. The certificates issued by certification bodies shall be clearly defined and easy to identify for workers and 
profess ionals seeking certification.
1b. The certification process shall enable installers to acquire the necessar y theoretical and practical knowledg e 
and guarantee the existen ce of skills needed to put in place high quality installations that operat e reliably .
2. Installers of system s using biomass, heat pump, shallow geother mal, solar photo voltaic and solar ther mal 
energy , including energy storage, and recharging points shall be certified by an accredited training 
programme or training provider or equivalent qualification sche mes.
3. The accreditation of the training programme or provid er shall be effected by Member State s or by the 
administrative body that they appoint. The accrediting body shall ensure that the training, including 
upskilling and reskilling programmes, offered by the training provi der are inclusive and have continuity and 
regional or national coverage.
The training provid er shall have adequat e technical facilities to provide practical training, including suffi cient 
laborat ory equipment or corresponding facilities to provid e practical training.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  74/77The training provider shall offer, in addition to the basic training, shor ter refresher and upskilling courses 
organised in training modules allowing installers and designers to add new compet ences, widen and diversify 
their skills across several types of technology and their combinations. The training provid er shall ensure 
adap tation of training to new renewable energy technology in the context of buildings, industr y and 
agriculture. Training providers shall recognise acquired relevant skills.
The training programmes and modules shall be designed to enable life-lo ng learning in renewable energy 
installations and be compat ible with vocational training for first time job seekers and adults seeking reskilling 
or new emplo yment.
The training programmes shall be designed in order to facilitat e acquir ing qualifi cations covering differ ent 
types of technology and solutions and avoid limited specialisation in a specific brand or technology . The 
training provid er may be the manufacturer of the equipment or system, institutes or associations.’;
(c) point 5 is replaced by the following:
‘5. The training course shall end with an examination leading to a certificate or qualification. The examination 
shall include a practical assessment of successfully installing biomass boilers or stoves, heat pumps, shallow 
geotherma l installations, solar photo voltaic or solar ther mal installations, including energy storag e, or 
recharging points, enabling demand response.’;
(d) point 6(c) is amended as follows:
(i) the introductor y wording is replaced by the follo wing:
‘(c) The theoretical part of the heat pump installer training should give an overview of the market situation for 
heat pumps and cover geotherma l energy sources and ground source temperatures of different regions, 
soil and rock identification for ther mal conductivity , regulations on using geotherma l energy sources, 
feasibility of using heat pumps in buildings and determining the most suitable heat pump system, and 
knowledg e about their technical requirements, safet y, air filtering, connection with the heat source and 
system layout, and integrat ion with energy stora ge solutions, including in combination with solar 
installations. The training should also provi de good knowledg e of any European standards for heat 
pumps, and of relevant national and Union law. The installer should demonstrate the followi ng key 
compet ences:’;
(ii) point (iii) is replaced by the following:
‘(iii) the ability to choose and size the compo nents in typical installation situations, including determining the 
typical values of the heat load of different buildings and for hot wate r production based on energy 
consum ption, determining the capacity of the heat pump on the heat load for hot water production, on 
the storag e mass of the building and on interrupti ble current supply ; determine energy storag e solutions, 
including via the buff er tank component and its volume and integration of a second heating system;
(iv) an understanding of feasibility and design studies;
(v) an understanding of drilling, in the case of geother mal heat pumps. ’;
(e) point 6(d) is amended as follows :
(i) the introductor y wording is replaced by the follo wing:
‘(d) The theoretical part of the solar phot ovoltaic and solar ther mal installer training should give an overview 
of the mark et situation of solar products and cost and prof itability compar isons, and cover ecological 
aspects, components, charact eristics and dimensioning of solar systems, selection of accurat e system s and 
dimensioning of compo nents, deter mination of the demand for heat, options for integrating energy 
storage solutions, fire protect ion, relat ed subsidies, as well as the design, installation and maintenance of 
solar photo voltaic and solar ther mal installations. The training should also provid e good kno wledge of 
any European standards for technology , and certification such as Solar Keymark , and relat ed national and 
Union law. The installer should demonstrate the following key compet ences:’;OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  75/77(ii) point (ii) is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(ii) the ability to identify systems and their compo nents specific to active and passive system s, including the 
mechanical design, and to determine the location of the compo nents, the system layout and the 
conf iguration, and options for the integration of energy storag e solutions, including through 
combination with recharging stations.’;
(5) in Annex V, part C is amended as follows :
(a) point 6 is replaced by the following:
‘6. For the purposes of the calculation refer red to in point 1(a), greenhouse gas emissions savings from improved 
agriculture manag ement, esca, such as shifting to reduced or zero-tillag e, improved crops and crop rotation, the 
use of cover crops, including crop residue manag ement, and the use of organic soil impro ver, such as compo st 
and manure fermentation digestat e, shall be taken into account only if they do not risk to nega tively affect 
biodiversity . Further , solid and verifiable evidence shall be provided that the soil carbon has increased or that it 
is reasonable to expect to have increased over the period in which the raw mate rials concer ned were cultivate d 
while taking into account the emissions where such practices lead to increased fertiliser and herbicide use (*).
_____________
(*) Measurements of soil carbon can constitute such evidence, e.g. by a first measurement in advance of the 
cultivation and subsequent ones at regular intervals several years apar t. In such a case, before the second 
measurement is available, increase in soil carbon would be estimat ed on the basis of representative 
exper iments or soil models. From the second measurement onwar ds, the measurements would constitute the 
basis for determining the existen ce of an increase in soil carbon and its magnitude.’;
(b) point 15 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘15. Emissions savings from CO 2 capture and replacement, eccr, shall be relat ed directly to the production of the 
biofuels or bioliquids to which they are attribut ed, and shall be limited to emissions avoided through the 
captur e of CO2 of which the carbon originates from biomass and which is used to replace fossil-der ived CO 2 
in the production of commercial products and services before 1 Januar y 2036 .’;
(c) point 18 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘18. For the purposes of the calculations refer red to in point 17, the emissions to be divided shall be 
eec + el + esca + those fractions of ep, etd, eccs and eccr that take place up to and including the process step at 
whic h a co-product is produced. If any allocation to co-products has take n place at an earlier process step in 
the life-cy cle, the fraction of those emissions assigned in the last such process step to the intermediat e fuel 
product shall be used for those purposes instead of the total of those emissions. In the case of biofuels and 
bioliquids, all co-products that do not fall under the scope of point 17 shall be taken into account for the 
purposes of that calculation.
Co-products that have a negative energy content shall be considered to have an energy content of zero for the 
purposes of the calculation.
As a general rule, waste s and residues including all wastes and residues included in Annex IX shall be 
considered to have zero life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions up to the process of collection of those mate rials 
irrespectively of whether they are processed to interi m products before being transf ormed into the final 
product.
In the case of biomass fuels produced in refiner ies, other than the combination of processing plants with 
boilers or coge neration units provid ing heat and/or electr icity to the processing plant, the unit of analysis for 
the purposes of the calculation refer red to in point 17 shall be the refiner y’;
(6) In Annex VI, part B is amended as follows:
(a) point 6 is replaced by the following:OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  76/77‘6. For the purposes of the calculation refer red to in point 1(a), greenhouse gas emissions savings from improved 
agriculture manage ment, esca, such as shifting to reduced or zero-tillage , impro ved crops and crops rotation, 
the use of cover crops, including crop residue manage ment, and the use of orga nic soil impro ver, such as 
compost and manure fermentation digestate, shall be taken into account only if they do not risk to negat ively 
affect biodiversity . Further , solid and verifiable evidence shall be provi ded that the soil carbon has increased or 
that it is reasonable to expect to have increased over the period in which the raw mater ials concer ned were 
cultivated while taking into account the emissions where such practices lead to increased fertiliser and 
herbicide use (*).
_____________
(*) Measurements of soil carbon can constitute such evidence, e.g. by a first measurement in advance of the 
cultivation and subsequent ones at regular intervals several years apar t. In such a case, before the second 
measurement is available, increase in soil carbon would be estimat ed on the basis of representative 
exper iments or soil models. From the second measurement onwar ds, the measurements would constitute the 
basis for determining the existen ce of an increase in soil carbon and its magnitude.’;
(b) point 15 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘15. Emissions savings from CO2 capture and replacement, eccr, shall be relat ed directly to the production of 
biomass fuels to which they are attribut ed, and shall be limited to emissions avoided through the capture of 
CO2 of whic h the carbon originates from biomass and which is used to replace fossil-der ived CO2 in the 
production of commercial products and services before 1 Januar y 2036 .’;
(c) point 18 is replaced by the follo wing:
‘18. For the purposes of the calculations refer red to in point 17, the emissions to be divided shall be 
eec + el + esca + those fractions of ep, etd, eccs and eccr that take place up to and including the process step at 
whic h a co-product is produced. If any allocation to co-products has take n place at an earlier process step in 
the life-cy cle, the fraction of those emissions assigned in the last such process step to the intermediat e fuel 
product shall be used for those purposes instead of the total of those emissions.
In the case of biogas and biomethane, all co-products that do not fall under the scope of point 17 shall be 
taken into account for the purposes of that calculation. Co-products that have a negative energy cont ent shall 
be considered to have an energy cont ent of zero for the purposes of the calculation.
As a general rule, waste s and residues including all wastes and residues included in Annex IX shall be 
considered to have zero life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions up to the process of collection of those mate rials 
irrespectively of whether they are processed to interi m products before being transf ormed into the final 
product.
In the case of biomass fuels produced in refiner ies, other than the combination of processing plants with 
boilers or coge neration units provid ing heat and/or electr icity to the processing plant, the unit of analysis for 
the purposes of the calculation refer red to in point 17 shall be the refiner y’;
(7) in Annex VII, in the definit ion of ‘Qusable ’, the referen ce to Article 7(4) is replaced by a reference to Article 7(3);
(8) Annex IX is amended as follows:
(a) in Part A, the introduct ory phrase is replaced by the followi ng:
‘Feedst ocks for the production of biogas for transpor t and advanced biofuels:’;
(b) in Part B, the introduct ory phrase is replaced by the following:
‘Feedst ocks for the production of biofuels and biogas for transpor t, the contr ibution of whic h towards the targe ts 
refer red to in Article 25(1), first subparagraph, point (a), shall be limite d to:’.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN 
ELI:  77/77ANNEX II 
Annex es I, II, IV and V to Directive 98/70/EC are amended as follows :
(1) Annex I is amended as follows:
(a) footnot e 1 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(1)Test methods shall be those specifi ed in EN 228:2012+A1:2017. Member States may adopt the analytical 
method specified in replacement EN 228:2012+A1:2017 standard if it can be shown to give at least the 
same accuracy and at least the same level of precision as the analytical method it replaces.’;
(b) footnot e 2 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(2)the values quote d in the specification are “true values”. In the establishment of their limit values, the term s 
of EN ISO 4259-1:2017/A1:2021 “Petroleum and relat ed products - Precision of measurement methods 
and results - Part 1: Determination of precision data in relation to methods of test” have been applied 
and in fixing a minimum value, a minimum differ ence of 2R abov e zero has been take n into account (R = 
reproducibility). The results of individual measurements shall be interpr eted on the basis of the criteria 
descr ibed in EN ISO 4259-2:2017/A1:2019.’;
(c) footnot e 6 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(6)Other mono-alcohols and ethers with a final boiling point no higher than that stated in EN 228:2012 
+A1:2017.’;
(2) Annex II is amended as follows:
(a) in the last line of the table, ‘FAME cont ent - EN 14078’, the entr y in the last column ‘Limits’ ‘Maximum’, ‘7,0’ is 
replaced by ’10,0’;
(b) footnot e 1 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(1)Test methods shall be those specified in EN 590:2013+A1:2017. Member States may adopt the analytical 
method specifi ed in replacement EN 590:2013+A1:2017 standard if it can be shown to give at least the same 
accuracy and at least the same level of precision as the analytical method it replaces.’;
(c) footnot e 2 is replaced by the followi ng:
‘(2)The values quoted in the specification are “true values”. In the establishment of their limit values, the term s of 
EN ISO 4259-1:2017/A1:2021 ‘Petroleum and related products - Precision or measurement methods and 
results - Part 1: Determination of precision data in relation to methods of test’ have been applied and in 
fixing a minimum value, a minimum difference of 2R above zero has been taken into account (R = 
reproducibility). The results of individual measurements shall be interpreted on the basis of the criteria 
descr ibed in EN ISO 4259-2:2017/A1:2019.’;
(3) Annex es IV and V are delet ed.OJ L, 31.10.2023 EN